[1]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. being.

[2]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. do better.

[3]: At 612b4, the ring is assigned to Gyges himself, not his ancestor.

[4]: In Seven against Thebes 592–4, it is said of Amphiaraus that “he did not wish to be believed to be the best but to be it.”The passage continues with the words Glaucon quotes below at 362a–b.

[5]: See Homer, Odyssey 16.97–8.

[6]: Hesiod,Works and Days 332–3.

[7]: Homer, Odyssey 19.109.

[8]: Works and Days 287–9, with minor alterations.

[9]: Iliad 9.497–501, with minor alterations.

[10]: The quotation is attributed to Simonides, who is cited by Polemarchus in Book 1.

[11]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. illusionistic painting.

[12]: At 361b–c.

[13]: Ekeinou tou andros: Sometimes taken to be a facetious, indexical reference to Thrasymachus, whose heirs (sons) in the argument Glaucon and Adeimantus self-
confessedly are. It is more likely, however, that it is an honoriﬁc expression equivalent in meaning to “that well-known man.”

[14]: Homosexual relations between older men and late-adolescent boys were an
acceptable part of Athenian social life, especially among the upper classes. See K. J.Dover, Greek Homosexuality (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978).

[15]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. relish.

[16]: See 558d8–559d2.

[17]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. rhapsode.

[18]: Philosophos: used here in its general sense to refer to intellectual curiosity or wanting knowledge for its own sake.

[19]: Philomathês.

[20]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. physical training, musical training.

[21]: Uranus prevented his wife, Gaia, from giving birth to his children by blocking them up inside her. Gaia gave a sickle to one of these children, Cronus, which he used to castrate his father when the latter next had intercourse with her. Cronus ate the children he had by his wife, Rhea, until, by deceiving him with a stone, she was able to save Zeus from suffering this fate. Zeus then overthrew his father. See Hesiod,Theogony 154–210, 453–506.

[22]: As at 377d10.

[23]: Theologia: theology.

[24]: Ho theos: literally,“the god.” But the deﬁnite article is almost certainly functioning as a universal quantiﬁer, as in “The swallow is a migratory bird,” which means (all) swallows migrate.

[25]: The ﬁrst three quotations are from Iliad 24.527–32.The sources for the fourth,
and for the quotation from Aeschylus, are unknown. The story of Athena urging
Pandarus to break the truce is told at Iliad 4.73–126.

[26]: Odyssey 17. 485–6.

[27]: Inachus was the father of Io, who was persecuted by Hera because Zeus was in love with her.The source for the part of the story Plato quotes is unknown.

[28]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. thing that is.


[30]: At Iliad 2.1–34, Zeus sends a dream to Agamemnon to promise success if he attacks Troy immediately. The promise is false. The source for the quotation from Aeschylus is unknown.

[31]: I.e., deny him the funding necessary to hire a chorus of actors and produce his play.
