[1]: This discussion begins at 445c, but is interrupted and does not resume again until
Book 8.

[2]: Ancient Greek statues were painted and gilded.

[3]: At formal drinking parties (sumposia), the toastmaster (sumposiarchos) sat at the head
of the table.The others sat in order of their importance, from his right counterclock-
wise around the table to his left.

[4]: The reference is obscure; it may be to a saying or proverb, or to a game like checkers called poleis, or cities, in which the set of pieces on each side, or perhaps any subset of them, were called cities, while the individual members of the sets were called
dogs.

[5]: 415a–c.

[6]: See 423c4.

[7]: Odyssey 1.351–2. Our text of Homer is slightly different.

[8]: Roughly seven feet.A cubit is between seventeen and twenty-two inches long.

[9]: The Hydra was a mythical monster.When one of its heads was cut off, two or three
new heads grew in its place. Heracles (or Hercules) had to slay the Hydra as one of
his labors.

[10]: The oracle of Apollo at Delphi was traditionally consulted by all Greeks on religious and other such matters.A stone there marked the supposed center of the earth.

[11]: 368b7–c3.

[12]: Euboulos: In Greek cities, the boulê was the council that had day-to-day responsibility for public affairs. In kingships it served as an advisory body to the kings; in
democratic Athens it served as an advisory body and steering committee for the
assembly of all the adult male citizens.

[13]: 414b1–6.

[14]: Carbonate of soda from Chalestra, a town and lake in Macedonia.

[15]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. temperance.

[16]: See 427d8–e4.

[17]: Iou iou: usually a cry of woe in tragedy, not (like iô iô) a cry of joy.

[18]: 428a2–9.

[19]: 368c7–369a3.

[20]: See 423c5–e2.

[21]: See 504b1–c4 for an explanation.

[22]: A fragment of the comedy Kapêlides by Theopompus (410–370 BCE) tells us that
a certain Leontinus (emended to Leontius because of Plato’s reference here) was
known for his love of boys as pale as corpses. So his desire is probably sexual in origin, and for that reason appetitive.The North and South Walls enclosed an area connecting Athens to Piraeus.

[23]: 439e5.

[24]: Odyssey 20.17. See 390d.

[25]: Reading toË lÒgou with Adam.

[26]: See 344b3 note.

[27]: 432d2–433b4.

[28]: Cf. 338e1–339a4.


[29]: The difference between knowledge (epistêmê) and belief (doxa) is explored at
475d1–480a13.

[30]: Reading douleÊein t“ toË érxikoË g°nouw with Adam 

[31]: I.e., the soul. See 353d9–10.

[32]: See 432c3–4.
