[1]: This task is taken up in Book 8.

[2]: See 423e4–424a2.

[3]: A proverbial expression applied to those who neglect the task at hand for an uncer-
tain proﬁt.Thrasymachus is reminding Socrates of his own words at 336e4–9.

[4]: This may be an allusion to the mimes of Sophron of Syracuse (c. 470–400 BCE),
which were divided into male mimes, in which men were represented, and female
ones, in which women were represented.

[5]: Respectable, well-to-do women lived secluded lives in most Greek states: they
were conﬁned to the household (see 579b8) and to domestic work and were largely
excluded from the public spheres of culture, politics, and warfare. See John Gould,
“Law, Custom and Myth: Aspects of the Social Position of Women in Classical Ath-
ens,” Journal of Hellenic Studies 100 (1980): 38–59.

[6]: The women will be gumnozomenas, which can mean stripped naked, but often also
means wearing a tunic, or undergarment, without a cloak (see 457a6–7). A palestra
was a wrestling school and training ground.

[7]: A reference, perhaps, to Aristophanes, Assembly Women, which makes fun of the
idea of women having political power and making laws like these. As in English, the
term hoplon (“weapon” or “tool”) was used to refer to the male genitals, and ocheuein
(“mounting,”“riding”) to refer to sexual intercourse (as at 454e1).

[8]: The story of Arion’s rescue by the dolphin is told in Herodotus, Histories 1.23–4.

[9]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. disputation.

[10]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. eristic.

[11]: 453c7–9.

[12]: Men were in charge of roasting meat. See 404b10–c4.

[13]: Epi pasi:The claim is not that no woman is stronger or better than any man in any
such pursuit (which would contradict 455d4–5), but that the physical weakness of
women is a relevant factor in all of them. See 451e1–2, 456a10–11.

[14]: 374e4–376c5.

[15]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. cloak.

[16]: Plato is adapting a phrase of Pindar.

[17]: The metaphor begins at 453c10–d7.

[18]: See 432c3–4.

[19]: Both hunting dogs and aviaries were common in rich Greek households.

[20]: 382c6–d3.

[21]: See 423b4–c5.

[22]: Infanticide by exposure was commonly used in ancient Greece as a method of
birth control.

[23]: See 414b8–c2.

[24]: 452b1–3.

[25]: Greek women were often married before they turned twenty.The puzzling char-
acterization of the minimum age for male procreation is, perhaps, explained by a pas-
sage from Aristotle’s Politics:“As to the bodily characteristics in parents that are most
beneﬁcial to the offspring being produced. . . . Neither the physical condition of
athletes nor that of one who is overly reliant on medical treatment and poorly suited
to exertion is useful from the point of view of health or procreation, or is the condi-
tion needed in a good citizen. But the condition that is in a mean between these two
is useful for these purposes.The proper physical condition, therefore, is one that is
achieved by exertion, but not by violent exertion, and that promotes not just one
thing, as the athletic condition does, but the actions of free people. And these should
be provided to women and men alike” (7.16 1335b2–12).

[26]: These are lunar months.The period is from roughly seven to roughly nine calen-
dar months.A fetus of less than seven months was considered nonviable.

[27]: Greek law did not usually permit marriage between biological siblings, who will
be included in the class referred to here. See 427c3.

[28]: The Athenian democracy had nine rulers (archons) in Plato’s time.These included
the chief magistrates, the chief military leader, and an important authority in reli-
gious matters.

[29]: See 429c5.

[30]: 462b4–c9.

[31]: 416d3–417b8.

[32]: Men victorious in the Olympic games were often awarded free meals for life by
their cities. See Apology 36d5–9.

[33]: 419a1–421c6.

[34]: Works and Days 40.

[35]: 460b1–5.

[36]: Iliad 7.321.

[37]: Iliad 8.162.

[38]: See 415a1–c7.

[39]: Works and Days 122. See Glossary of Terms s.v. diamon.

[40]: Apollo. See 427c2 note.

[41]: Greek views on pollution are discussed in R. Parker, Miasma (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1983).

[42]: See 414e1–6.

[43]: The third wave was proverbially the greatest.

[44]: See 369a5–c10.

[45]: As at 458c6 and 473e4–5, Socrates is supposing that Glaucon is designing the ideal
city.

[46]: See 437d8–e8, 475b11–c4.

[47]: Trittarchousi:“command the soldiers in a trittys.” A trittys was one third of one of
the ten tribes of which Athens consisted.

[48]: See 449c6–8.

[49]: A poem or play is fashioned out of sounds, a painting out of colors and shapes. See
600e4–601b4.

[50]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. thing that is.

[51]: The riddle seems to have been this: a man who is not a man saw and did not see a
bird that was not a bird in a tree (xulon) that was not a tree; he hit (ballein) and did
not hit it with a stone that was not a stone.The answer is that a eunuch with bad
eyesight saw a bat on a rafter, threw a pumice stone at it, and missed. For “he saw a
bird” is ambiguous between “he saw what was actually a bird” and “he saw what he
took to be a bird,” xulon means both “tree” and “rafter” or “roof tree,” and ballein
means both “to throw” and “to hit.”The rest is obvious.

[52]: See 484c6–d3, 493a6–494a4.

[53]: See 451b3.
