# Linked Discourses on the Eightfold Path

## The Chapter on Ignorance

### N 45.1 Ignorance *Avijjāsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities,
with lack of conscience and prudence following along. An ignoramus, sunk
in ignorance, gives rise to wrong view. Wrong view gives rise to wrong
thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. Wrong speech gives
rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. Wrong
livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong effort gives rise to wrong
mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion.

Knowledge precedes the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience
and prudence following along. A sage, firm in knowledge, gives rise to
right view. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives
rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right
action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to
right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right
mindfulness gives rise to right immersion."

### N 45.2 Half the Spiritual Life *Upaḍḍhasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Townsville. Then
Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are half the spiritual
life."

"Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda! Good friends, companions, and
associates are the whole of the spiritual life. A mendicant with good
friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, which
relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting
go. They develop right thought ... right speech ... right action ...
right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ... right
immersion, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripens as letting go. That's how a mendicant with good friends develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

And here's another way to understand how good friends are the whole of
the spiritual life. For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient
beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these
things. This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole
of the spiritual life."

### N 45.3 Sāriputta *Sāriputtasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the
spiritual life."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Good friends, companions, and
associates are the whole of the spiritual life. A mendicant with good
friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path. And how does a mendicant with good friends
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path?

It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

And here's another way to understand how good friends are the whole of
the spiritual life. For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient
beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these
things. This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole
of the spiritual life."

### N 45.4 Regarding the Brahmin Jānussoṇi *Jāṇussoṇibrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. He saw the brahmin
Jānussoṇi driving out of Sāvatthī in a
splendid all-white chariot drawn by mares. The yoked horses were pure
white, as were the ornaments, chariot, upholstery, reins, goad, and
canopy. And his turban, robes, sandals were white, as was the chowry
fanning him.

When people saw it they exclaimed, "Wow! That's a divine vehicle! It's a
vehicle fit for divinity!"

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal,
on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened, adding, "Sir, can you point
out a divine vehicle in this teaching and training?"

"I can, Ānanda," said the Buddha.

"These are all terms for the noble eightfold path: 'divine vehicle, or
else 'vehicle of truth', or else 'supreme victory in battle'.

When right view is developed and cultivated it culminates with the
removal of greed, hate, and delusion. When right thought ... right
speech ... right action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right
mindfulness ... right immersion is developed and cultivated it
culminates with the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is a way to understand how these are all terms for the noble
eightfold path: 'vehicle of divine', or else 'vehicle of truth', or else
'supreme victory in battle'."

That is what the Buddha said.

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

> "Its qualities of faith and wisdom\
> are always yoked to the shaft.\
> Conscience is its pole, mind its strap,\
> and mindfulness its careful driver.
>
> The chariot's equipped with ethics,\
> its axle is absorption, and energy its wheel.\
> Equanimity and immersion are the carriage-shaft,\
> and it's upholstered with desirelessness.
>
> Good will, harmlessness, and seclusion\
> are its weapons,\
> patience its shield and armor,\
> as it rolls on to sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> This supreme divine vehicle\
> arises in oneself.\
> The attentive leave the world in it,\
> sure of winning the victory."

### N 45.5 What's the Purpose *Kimatthiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, sometimes wanderers of other religions ask us: 'Reverends, what's
the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?' We
answer them like this: 'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under
the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.'

Answering this way, we trust that we repeat what the Buddha has said,
and don't misrepresent him with an untruth. We trust our explanation is
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I've said, and don't
misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the
teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.
For the purpose of leading the spiritual life under me is to completely
understand suffering.

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for completely understanding that suffering?' You should answer
them like this: 'There is.'

And what is that path? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path
and the practice for completely understanding suffering. When questioned
by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer them."

### N 45.6 A Mendicant (1st) *Paṭhamaaññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is the spiritual
path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Mendicant, the spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that
is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. The
ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

### N 45.7 A Mendicant (2nd) *Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'the removal of greed, hate, and delusion'. What is
this a term for?"

"Mendicant, the removal of greed, hate, and delusion is a term for the
element of extinguishment. It's used to speak of the ending of
defilements."

When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'freedom from death'. What is freedom from death?
And what is the path that leads to freedom from death?"

"The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called freedom from
death. The path that leads to freedom from death is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion."

### N 45.8 Analysis *Vibhaṅgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you the noble eightfold path.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the noble eightfold path? It is right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering. This is called right view.

And what is right thought? It is the thought of renunciation, good will,
and harmlessness. This is called right thought.

And what is right speech? Avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing,
and sexual activity. This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called right
livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have
not arisen do arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development. This is called right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is called right mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion."

### N 45.9 A Spike *Sūkasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it is impossible for it to
break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is
pointing the wrong way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the wrong way cannot break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
wrong way.

Suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right way. If you
trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the skin and
produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the right way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way may well break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
right way.

And how does a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way break ignorance, give rise to knowledge, and
realize extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way breaks
ignorance, gives rise to knowledge, and realizes extinguishment."

### N 45.10 With Nandiya *Nandiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Nandiya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, how many things, when developed and cultivated, have
extinguishment as their culmination, destination, and end?"

"These eight things, when developed and cultivated, have extinguishment
as their culmination, destination, and end. What eight? They are: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things, when
developed and cultivated, have extinguishment as their culmination,
destination, and end."

When he said this, the wanderer Nandiya said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
worthy Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

## The Chapter on Meditation

### N 45.11 Meditation (1st) *Paṭhamavihārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for a fortnight. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I've been practicing part of the meditation I practiced
when I was first awakened. I understand that there's feeling conditioned
by wrong view and feeling conditioned by right view. ... There's feeling
conditioned by wrong immersion, and feeling conditioned by right
immersion.

There's feeling conditioned by desire, by thought, and by perception. As
long as desire, thought, and perception are not stilled, there is
feeling conditioned by that. When desire, thought, and perception are
stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been
attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that."

### N 45.12 Meditation (2nd) *Dutiyavihārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I've been practicing part of the meditation I practiced
when I was first awakened.

I understand that there's feeling conditioned by wrong view and by the
stilling of wrong view, by right view and by the stilling of right view.
... There's feeling conditioned by wrong immersion and by the stilling
of wrong immersion, by right immersion and by the stilling of right
immersion.

There's feeling conditioned by desire and by the stilling of desire, by
thought and by the stilling of thought, by perception and by the
stilling of perception. As long as desire, thought, and perception are
not stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. When desire, thought,
and perception are stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been
attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that."

### N 45.13 A Trainee *Sekkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of this person called 'a trainee'. How is a trainee defined?"

"Mendicant, it's someone who has a trainee's right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. That's how a trainee is defined."

### N 45.14 Arising (1st) *Paṭhamauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be developed and
cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha has appeared. What eight? They are: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things don't arise to be
developed and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha has appeared."

### N 45.15 Arising (2nd) *Dutiyauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be developed and
cultivated apart from the Holy One's training. What eight? They are:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These are the
eight things that don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart from
the Holy One's training."

### N 45.16 Purified (1st) *Paṭhamaparisuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions except when a Realized One, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha has appeared. What eight? They are: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things don't
arise to be purified, bright, flawless, and rid of corruptions except
when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
appeared."

### N 45.17 Purified (2nd) *Dutiyaparisuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions apart from the Holy One's training.
What eight? They are: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion. These eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions apart from the Holy One's training."

### N 45.18 At the Chicken Monastery (1st) *Paṭhamakukkuṭārāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the venerables Ānanda and
Bhadda were staying near Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken
Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called 'not the spiritual path'.
What is not the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'They speak of this
thing called "not the spiritual path". What is not the spiritual path?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"What is not the spiritual path is simply the wrong eightfold path, that
is: wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion."

### N 45.19 At the Chicken Monastery (2nd) *Dutiyakukkuṭārāmasutta*

At Pāṭaliputta.

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is
the spiritual path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'They speak of this
thing called "the spiritual path". What is the spiritual path? And what
is the culmination of the spiritual path?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"The spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

The ending of greed, hate, and delusion: this is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

### N 45.20 At the Chicken Monastery (3rd) *Tatiyakukkuṭārāmasutta*

At Pāṭaliputta.

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is
the spiritual path? Who is someone on the spiritual path? And what is
the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. ...

The spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

Someone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called someone on the
spiritual path.

The ending of greed, hate, and delusion: this is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

## The Chapter on the Wrong Way

### N 45.21 The Wrong Way *Micchattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong way and the right way. Listen
...

And what is the wrong way? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong way.

And what is the right way? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right way."

### N 45.22 Unskillful Qualities *Akusaladhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you skillful and unskillful qualities. Listen
...

And what are unskillful qualities? They are wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, and wrong immersion. These are called unskillful qualities.

And what are skillful qualities? They are right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These are called skillful qualities."

### N 45.23 Practice (1st) *Paṭhamapaṭipadāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice.
Listen ...

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice.

And what's the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right practice."

### N 45.24 Practice (2nd) *Dutiyapaṭipadāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I don't praise wrong practice for laypeople or renunciates.
Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in
the system of the skillful teaching.

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice. I don't praise
wrong practice for lay people or renunciates. Because of wrong practice,
neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the system of the skillful
teaching.

I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates. Because of right
practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the system of the
skillful teaching. And what's the right practice? It is right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the right
practice. I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates.

Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the
system of the skillful teaching."

### N 45.25 An Untrue Person (1st) *Paṭhamaasappurisasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and a true person. Listen
...

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called an untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called a true person."

### N 45.26 An Untrue Person (2nd) *Dutiyaasappurisasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person. Listen ...

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is called an even truer person."

### N 45.27 Pots *Kumbhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it's
hard to overturn. In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to
overturn, but if it has a stand it's hard to overturn.

And what's the stand for the mind? It is simply this noble eightfold
path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.
This is the stand for the mind.

A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it's
hard to overturn. In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to
overturn, but if it has a stand it's hard to overturn."

### N 45.28 Immersion *Samādhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital
conditions and its prerequisites. Listen ...

And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its
prerequisites? There are right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.

Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites is called
noble right immersion 'with its vital conditions' and 'with its
prerequisites'."

### N 45.29 Feeling *Vedanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings. What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
these three feelings. What is the noble eightfold path? It is right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
these three feelings."

### N 45.30 With Uttiya *Uttiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Uttiya went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Just
now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. 'The
Buddha has spoken of the five kinds of sensual stimulation. What are
they?'"

"Good, good, Uttiya! I have spoken of these five kinds of sensual
stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by
the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ...
Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual
stimulation that I've spoken of.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to give up these five kinds
of sensual stimulation. What is the noble eightfold path? It is right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the noble
eightfold path that should be developed to give up these five kinds of
sensual stimulation."

## The Chapter on Practice

### N 45.31 Practice (1st) *Paṭhamapaṭipattisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice.
Listen ...

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice.

And what's the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right practice."

### N 45.32 Practice (2nd) *Dutiyapaṭipattisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you one practicing wrongly and one practicing
rightly. Listen ...

And who is practicing wrongly? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called one practicing
wrongly.

And who is practicing rightly? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called one practicing
rightly."

### N 45.33 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble
path to the complete ending of suffering.

And what is the noble eightfold path? It is right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

Whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the
noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken
the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete
ending of suffering."

### N 45.34 Going to the Far Shore *Pāraṅgamasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when these eight things are developed and cultivated they
lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What eight? They are
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. When these eight
things are developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near
shore to the far shore."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's dominion so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

### N 45.35 The Ascetic Life (1st) *Paṭhamasāmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the ascetic life and the fruits of the
ascetic life. Listen ...

And what is the ascetic life? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the ascetic life.

And what are the fruits of the ascetic life? The fruits of stream-entry,
once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called the fruits of
the ascetic life."

### N 45.36 The Ascetic Life (2nd) *Dutiyasāmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the ascetic life and the goal of the
ascetic life. Listen ...

And what is the ascetic life? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the ascetic life.

And what is the goal of the ascetic life? The ending of greed, hate, and
delusion. This is called the goal of the ascetic life."

### N 45.37 The Brahmin Life (1st) *Paṭhamabrahmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you life as a brahmin and the fruits of life
as a brahmin. Listen ...

And what is life as a brahmin? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called life as a brahmin.

And what are the fruits of life as a brahmin? The fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called
the fruits of life as a brahmin."

### N 45.38 The Brahmin Life (2nd) *Dutiyabrahmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you life as a brahmin and the goal of life as
a brahmin. Listen ...

And what is life as a brahmin? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called life as a brahmin.

And what is the goal of life as a brahmin? The ending of greed, hate,
and delusion. This is called the goal of life as a brahmin."

### N 45.39 The Spiritual Path (1st) *Paṭhamabrahmacariyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the spiritual path and the fruits of the
spiritual path. Listen ...

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the spiritual path.

And what are the fruits of the spiritual path? The fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called
the fruits of the spiritual path."

### N 45.40 The Spiritual Path (2nd) *Dutiyabrahmacariyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the spiritual path and the goal of the
spiritual path. Listen ...

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the spiritual path.

And what is the goal of the spiritual path? The ending of greed, hate,
and delusion. This is called the goal of the spiritual path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Followers of Other Paths

### N 45.41 The Fading Away of Greed *Rāgavirāgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this: 'The purpose of
leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is the fading away of
greed.'

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for the fading away of greed?' You should answer them like
this: 'There is a path and a practice for the fading away of greed.'

And what is that path, what is that practice for the fading away of
greed? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice for the fading away of greed.

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should
answer them."

### N 45.42--47 Six Discourses on Giving Up Fetters, Etc. *Saṁyojanappahānādisuttachakka*

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this:

'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to give
up the fetters.' ...

'... to uproot the underlying tendencies.' ...

'... to completely understand the course of time.' ...

'... to end the defilements.' ...

'... to realize the fruit of knowledge and freedom.' ...

'... for knowledge and vision.' ..."

### N 45.48 Extinguishment by Not Grasping *Anupādāparinibbānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this: 'The purpose of
leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is extinguishment by not
grasping.'

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for extinguishment by not grasping?' You should answer them
like this: 'There is a path and a practice for extinguishment by not
grasping.'

And what is that path, what is that practice for extinguishment by not
grasping? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice for extinguishment by not grasping.

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should
answer them."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Sun

### N 45.49 Good Friends (1st) *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way good friendship is the forerunner and precursor of the
noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.50--54 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (1st) *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in ethics is the forerunner and precursor of
the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant accomplished in
ethics can expect ..." ...

"... accomplished in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplished in self-development ..."

"... accomplished in view ..."

"... accomplished in diligence ..."

### N 45.55 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (1st) *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in rational application of mind is the
forerunner and precursor of the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.56 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way good friendship is the forerunner and precursor of the
noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.57--61 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (2nd) *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in ethics is the forerunner and precursor of
the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.62 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on One Thing

### N 45.63 Good Friends (1st) *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's good friendship. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.64--68 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (1st) *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.69 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (1st) *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.70 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's good friendship. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.71--75 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (2nd) *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.76 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on One Thing

### N 45.77 Good Friends *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like good
friendship. A mendicant with good friends can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.78--82 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like
accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.83 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.84 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like good
friendship. A mendicant with good friends can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.85--89 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like
accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.90 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 45.91 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.92--95 Four Discourses on Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasuttacatukka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

### N 45.96 Sixth Discourse on Slanting East *Chaṭṭhapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, all the great rivers---that is, the Ganges,
Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---slant, slope, and incline towards the east. In the
same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold
path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.97 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. ..."

### N 45.98--102 Five Discourses on Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 45.103 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.104--108 Five Discourses on Sloping to the East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.109 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.110--114 Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.115 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.116--120 Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.121 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.122--126 Sloping to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.127 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants,
slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.128--132 Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.133 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants,
slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.134--138 Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Diligence

### N 45.139 The Realized One *Tathāgatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who
is diligent develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who is diligent
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who is diligent develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who is diligent
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.140 Footprints *Padasutta*

"The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint. So an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and
meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. A
mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. ... That's how a mendicant
who is diligent develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.141--145 A Roof Peak *Kūṭādisutta*

"Mendicants, the rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to
the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of
them all. In the same way ..."

**(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)**

"Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. ..."

"Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. ..."

"Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. ..."

"All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. ..."

### N 45.146--148 The Moon, Etc. *Candimādisutta*

"The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. ..."

"In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates. ..."

"Mendicants, cloth from Kāsi is said to be the best kind of
woven cloth. ..."

**(Tell these in full as in the section on the Realized One.)**

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 45.149 Hard Work *Balasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, all the hard work that gets done depends on the earth and
is grounded on the earth. In the same way, a mendicant develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics.

And how does a mendicant grounded on ethics develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
grounded on ethics develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

"... which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion ..."

"... culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death ..."

"... slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment ..."

### N 45.150 Seeds *Bījasutta*

"All the plants and seeds that achieve growth, increase, and maturity do
so depending on the earth and grounded on the earth. In the same way, a
mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good
qualities.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good
qualities? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away,
and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on
ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good qualities."

### N 45.151 Dragons *Nāgasutta*

"Mendicants, dragons grow and wax strong supported by the Himalayas, the
king of mountains. When they're strong they dive into the pools. Then
they dive into the lakes, the streams, the rivers, and finally the
ocean. There they acquire a great and abundant body. In the same way, a
mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities?
It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring
great and abundant good qualities."

### N 45.152 Trees *Rukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a tree slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. If
it was cut off at the root, where would it fall?"

"Sir, it would fall in the direction that it slants, slopes, and
inclines."

"In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.153 Pots *Kumbhasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water
drains out and doesn't go back in. In the same way, a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't let them back in.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path expel
bad, unskillful qualities and not let them back in? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful qualities and doesn't
let them back in."

### N 45.154 A Spike *Sūkasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the
skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the
right way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way may well break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
right way.

And how does a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way break ignorance, give rise to knowledge, and
realize extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way breaks
ignorance, gives rise to knowledge, and realizes extinguishment."

### N 45.155 The Sky *Ākāsasutta*

"Mendicants, various winds blow in the sky. Winds blow from the east,
the west, the north, and the south. There are winds that are dusty and
dustless, cool and warm, weak and strong. In the same way, when the
noble eightfold path is developed and cultivated the following are fully
developed: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five
powers, and the seven awakening factors.

And how are they fully developed? It's when a mendicant develops right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion,
fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how they're
fully developed."

### N 45.156 Storms (1st) *Paṭhamameghasutta*

"Mendicants, in the last month of summer, when the dust and dirt is
stirred up, a large sudden storm disperses and settles it on the spot.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities on the
spot.

How does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path disperse and
still bad, unskillful qualities on the spot? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold
path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities on the spot."

### N 45.157 Storms (2nd) *Dutiyameghasutta*

"Mendicants, when a large storm has arisen, a strong wind disperses and
settles it as it proceeds. In the same way, a mendicant who develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful
qualities as they proceed.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path disperse
and still bad, unskillful qualities as they proceed? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities
as they proceed."

### N 45.158 A Ship *Nāvāsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with
ropes. For six months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold
season it was hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by
wind and sun. When the clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would
readily collapse and rot away. In the same way, when a mendicant
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path their fetters readily
collapse and rot away.

And how do they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that
their fetters readily collapse and rot away? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that
their fetters readily collapse and rot away."

### N 45.159 A Guest House *Āgantukasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a guest house. Lodgers come from the
east, west, north, and south. Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials all stay there. In the same way, a mendicant who develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path completely understands by direct
knowledge the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge. They give up by direct knowledge the things that should be
given up by direct knowledge. They realize by direct knowledge the
things that should be realized by direct knowledge. They develop by
direct knowledge the things that should be developed by direct
knowledge.

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. What five?
That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These
are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.
And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for continued existence. These are the things that
should be given up by direct knowledge. And what are the things that
should be realized by direct knowledge? Knowledge and freedom. These are
the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. And what are the
things that should be developed by direct knowledge? Serenity and
discernment. These are the things that should be developed by direct
knowledge.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path in this way?
It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates
the eightfold path in this way."

### N 45.160 A River *Nadīsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and
inclines to the east, a large crowd were to come along with a spade and
basket, saying: 'We'll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline
to the west!'

What do you think, mendicants? Would they succeed?"

"No, sir. Why is that? The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to
the east. It's not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the
west. That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path, if rulers or their chief ministers, friends or
colleagues, relatives or kin should invite them to accept wealth,
saying: 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment you? Why
follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl?
Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!' It is
quite impossible for a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path to resign the training and return to a lesser life. Why
is that? Because for a long time that mendicant's mind has slanted,
sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it's impossible for them to return
to a lesser life.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates the
noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 45.161 Searches *Esanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
..."

::: small
*(Tell in full with "completely understand" instead of "directly
know".)*
:::

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to finish ..."

**(Tell in full with "finish" instead of "directly know".)**

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to give up ..."

**(Tell in full with "give up" instead of "directly know".)**

### N 45.162 Discriminations *Vidhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of discrimination. What three? One
discriminates, thinking that 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'.
These are the three kinds of discrimination.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of
discrimination. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
three kinds of discrimination."

**(Tell in full as in the section on searches.)**

### N 45.163 Defilements *Āsavasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three defilements. What three? The
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are
the three defilements.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
defilements."

### N 45.164 States of Existence *Bhavasutta*

"There are these three states of existence. What three? Existence in the
sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm. These
are the three states of existence.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three states
of existence."

### N 45.165 Forms of Suffering *Dukkhatāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three forms of suffering. What three? The
suffering inherent in painful feeling; the suffering inherent in
conditions; and the suffering inherent in perishing. These are the three
forms of suffering.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three forms of
suffering."

### N 45.166 Kinds of Barrenness *Khilasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of barrenness. What three?
Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the three kinds of barrenness.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of
barrenness."

### N 45.167 Stains *Malasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three stains. What three? Greed, hate, and
delusion. These are the three stains.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three stains."

### N 45.168 Troubles *Nīghasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three troubles. What three? Greed, hate,
and delusion. These are the three troubles.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
troubles."

### N 45.169 Feelings *Vedanāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings: What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
feelings."

### N 45.170 Craving *Taṇhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three cravings. What three? Craving for
sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end
existence. These are the three cravings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
cravings. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
three cravings."

#### Thirst

"Mendicants, there are these three thirsts. What three? Thirst for
sensual pleasures, thirst to continue existence, and thirst to end
existence.

For the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving
up of these three thirsts ... ... which culminates in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... which culminates, finishes, and ends in
freedom from death. ... which slants, slopes, and inclines to
extinguishment.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
thirsts."

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 45.171 Floods *Oghasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four floods. What four? The floods of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, views, and ignorance. These are the
four floods.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four floods."

**(Tell in full as in the section on searches.)**

### N 45.172 Yokes *Yogasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four yokes. What four? The yokes of sensual
pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. These are the four yokes.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four yokes."

### N 45.173 Grasping *Upādānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of grasping. What four? Grasping
at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self. These are the four kinds of grasping.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four kinds of
grasping."

### N 45.174 Personal Ties *Ganthasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ties. What four? The personal ties to
covetousness, ill will, misapprehension of precepts and observances, and
the insistence that this is the only truth. These are the four ties.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four ties."

### N 45.175 Tendencies *Anusayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven underlying tendencies. What seven?
The underlying tendencies of sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are the seven
underlying tendencies.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these seven
underlying tendencies."

### N 45.176 Kinds of Sensual Stimulation *Kāmaguṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What
five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five kinds of
sensual stimulation."

### N 45.177 Hindrances *Nīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five hindrances. What five? The hindrances
of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and
remorse, and doubt. These are the five hindrances.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five
hindrances."

### N 45.178 Grasping Aggregates *Upādānakkhandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? The
grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. These are the five grasping aggregates.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five grasping
aggregates."

### N 45.179 Lower Fetters *Orambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five lower fetters. What five? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five lowers
fetters."

### N 45.180 Higher Fetters *Uddhambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters."

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion ..." "... which
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death ..." "... which slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters."

*The Linked Discourses on the Path is the first section.*

