# Linked Discourses with Anuruddha

## The Chapter on In Private

### N 52.1 In Private (1st) *Paṭhamarahogatasutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Anuruddha was
staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then as Anuruddha was in private
retreat this thought came to his mind:

"Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha
was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha, and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?"

"Reverend, it's when a mendicant meditates observing the body internally
as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate
and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing the body externally
as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate
and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing the body internally
and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to originate and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive
and the repulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do.

They meditate observing feelings internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

They meditate observing the mind internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

They meditate observing principles internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. ... If they wish: 'May I meditate
staying equanimous, mindful and aware, ignoring both the repulsive and
the unrepulsive,' that's what they do.

That's how to define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation by a mendicant."

### N 52.2 In Private (2nd) *Dutiyarahogatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then as Anuruddha was in private retreat this thought came to his mind:

"Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha
was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?"

"Reverend, it's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body internally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the body
externally ... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally ... externally
... internally and externally ...

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally ... externally
... internally and externally ...

They meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...
externally ... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how to define the
undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant."

### N 52.3 On the Bank of the Sutanu *Sutanusutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
on the bank of the Sutanu. Then several mendicants went up to Venerable
Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I attained great
direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And it was by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness
meditation that I directly knew the lower realm as lower, the middle
realm as middle, and the higher realm as higher."

### N 52.4 At Thorny Wood (1st) *Paṭhamakaṇḍakīsutta*

At one time the venerables Anuruddha, Sāriputta, and
Mahāmoggallāna were staying near Sāketa, in
the Thorny Wood. Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta and
Mahāmoggallāna came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to
Anuruddha:

"Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a trainee mendicant enter and
remain in?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, a trainee mendicant should enter and
remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when
a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. A
trainee mendicant should enter and remain in these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation."

### N 52.5 At Thorny Wood (2nd) *Dutiyakaṇḍakīsutta*

At Sāketa. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha:

"Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a mendicant who is an adept
enter and remain in?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, a mendicant who is an adept should
enter and remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four?
It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. A mendicant who is an adept should enter and
remain in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 52.6 At Thorny Wood (3rd) *Tatiyakaṇḍakīsutta*

At Sāketa. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverend, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I attained great
direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I directly know the thousandfold galaxy."

### N 52.7 The Ending of Craving *Taṇhākkhayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Anuruddha said this:

"Reverends, when these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are
developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of craving. What four?
It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body ...
feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. When these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated they lead to the
ending of craving."

### N 52.8 The Frankincense-Tree Hut *Salaḷāgārasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in the frankincense-tree hut. There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the
mendicants: "Reverends, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants,
slopes, and inclines to the east, a large crowd were to come along with
a spade and basket, saying: 'We'll make this Ganges river slant, slope,
and incline to the west!' What do you think, reverends? Would they
succeed?"

"No, reverend. Why is that? The Ganges river slants, slopes, and
inclines to the east. It's not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline
to the west. That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, if rulers or their chief ministers,
friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept
wealth, saying: 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment
you? Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms
bowl? Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!'

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who is developing and cultivating
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation to resign the training and
return to a lesser life. Why is that? Because for a long time that
mendicant's mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it's
impossible for them to return to a lesser life.

And how does a mendicant develop and cultivate the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an
aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

### N 52.9 In Ambapālī's Mango Grove *Ambapālivanasutta*

At one time the venerables Anuruddha and Sāriputta were
staying near Vesālī, in Ambapālī's Mango
Grove. Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of
retreat, went to Anuruddha, and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, your faculties are so very clear, and your
complexion is pure and bright. What kind of meditation are you usually
practicing these days?"

"These days, reverend, I usually meditate with my mind firmly
established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. These days I usually meditate with my mind
firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. A
mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---usually
meditates with their mind firmly established in these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation."

"We're so fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate, to have heard such a
dramatic statement in the presence of Venerable Anuruddha."

### N 52.10 Gravely Ill *Bāḷhagilānasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in the Dark Forest. And he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then
several mendicants went up to Venerable Anuruddha, and said to him:

"What meditation does Venerable Anuruddha practice so that physical pain
doesn't occupy his mind?"

"Reverends, I meditate with my mind firmly established in the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation so that physical pain doesn't occupy my mind.
What four? I meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ...
mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. I meditate with my mind firmly established in
these four kinds of mindfulness meditation so that physical pain doesn't
occupy my mind."

## Chapter Two

### N 52.11 A Thousand Eons *Kappasahassasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then several
mendicants went up to Venerable Anuruddha, exchanged greetings with him
... and said:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. I attained great direct knowledge by
developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I recollect a thousand eons."

### N 52.12 Psychic Powers *Iddhividhasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying myself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity."

### N 52.13 Clairaudience *Dibbasotasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that, with clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far."

### N 52.14 Comprehending the Mind *Cetopariyasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. I understand mind
with greed as 'mind with greed' ... I understand unfreed mind as
'unfreed mind'."

### N 52.15 Possible *Ṭhānasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the possible as possible
and the impossible as impossible."

### N 52.16 The Results of Deeds Undertaken *Kammasamādānasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes."

### N 52.17 Where All Paths of Practice Lead *Sabbatthagāminisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand where all paths of
practice lead."

### N 52.18 Diverse Elements *Nānādhātusutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the world with its many
and diverse elements."

### N 52.19 Diverse Beliefs *Nānādhimuttisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the diverse convictions
of sentient beings."

### N 52.20 Comprehending the Faculties of Others *Indriyaparopariyattasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with my
mind."

### N 52.21 Absorptions, Etc. *Jhānādisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments."

### N 52.22 Past Lives *Pubbenivāsasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I recollect my many kinds of past lives,
with features and details."

### N 52.23 Clairvoyance *Dibbacakkhusutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, I understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds."

### N 52.24 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And I live having realized it
with my own insight due to the ending of defilements."



