# Linked Discourses on Breath Meditation

## The Chapter on One Thing

### N 54.1 One Thing *Ekadhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when one thing is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. What one thing? Mindfulness of breathing.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very
fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When breathing in
lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly
they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in stilling physical processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out stilling physical processes.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing bliss.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing bliss.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing mental processes.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in gladdening the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out gladdening the mind.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in
samādhi.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing
the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing impermanence.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing cessation.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out observing cessation.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial."

### N 54.2 Awakening Factors *Bojjhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? It's when a
mendicant develops mindfulness of breathing together with the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. Mindfulness of breathing,
when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and
beneficial."

### N 54.3 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial."

### N 54.4 Fruits (1st) *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial. When mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated in this way you can expect one of two results:
enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something left over,
non-return."

### N 54.5 Fruits (2nd) *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial.

When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way
you can expect seven fruits and benefits. What seven? You attain
enlightenment early on in this very life. If not, you attain
enlightenment at the time of death. If not, with the ending of the five
lower fetters you're extinguished in between one life and the next ...
you're extinguished upon landing ... you're extinguished without extra
effort ... you're extinguished with extra effort ... you head upstream,
going to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... When mindfulness of
breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect these
seven fruits and benefits."

### N 54.6 With Ariṭṭha *Ariṭṭhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha ... said:

"Mendicants, do you develop mindfulness of breathing?" When he said
this, Venerable Ariṭṭha said to him:

"Sir, I develop mindfulness of breathing."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"Sir, I've given up desire for sensual pleasures of the past. I'm rid of
desire for sensual pleasures of the future. And I have eliminated
perception of repulsion regarding phenomena internally and externally.
Just mindful, I will breathe in. Mindful, I will breathe out. That's how
I develop mindfulness of breathing."

"That is mindfulness of breathing, Ariṭṭha; I don't deny
it. But as to how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail,
listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ariṭṭha replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how is mindfulness of breathing fulfilled in detail? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they breathe
in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing
out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing
letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing
letting go.' This is how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in
detail."

### N 54.7 About Mahākappina *Mahākappinasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time Venerable Mahākappina was sitting not far
from the Buddha, cross-legged, his body set straight, and mindfulness
established in his presence. The Buddha saw him, and addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, do you see any disturbance or trembling in that mendicant's
body?"

"Sir, whenever we see that mendicant meditating---whether in the middle
of the Saṅgha or alone in private---we never see any
disturbance or trembling in his body."

"Mendicants, when an immersion has been developed and cultivated there's
no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind. That mendicant gets
such immersion when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. And what is
that immersion?

When immersion due to mindfulness of breathing has been developed and
cultivated there's no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind. And
how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and
cultivated in such a way?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ... They practice like this:
'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so that there's no disturbance or trembling of the body or
mind."

### N 54.8 The Simile of the Lamp *Padīpopamasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. How so?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting go.' That's how immersion due to mindfulness of
breathing, when developed and cultivated, is very fruitful and
beneficial.

Before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I too usually practiced this kind of meditation. And while I
was usually practicing this kind of meditation neither my body nor my
eyes became fatigued. And my mind was freed from defilements by not
grasping.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May neither my body nor my eyes became
fatigued. And may my mind be freed from the defilements by not
grasping.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I give up memories and thoughts tied
to domestic life.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive and the repulsive.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive and the unrepulsive.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.' So let
them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, may I enter and remain in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected.' So let them closely focus on
this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, may I enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' So
let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of
breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'With the fading away of rapture, may I
enter and remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss."' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'With the giving up of pleasure and pain,
and the ending of former happiness and sadness, may I enter and remain
in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond perceptions of form,
with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite", may I enter
and remain in the dimension of infinite space.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", may I enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", may I
enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, may I enter and remain in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, may I enter and remain in the
cessation of perception and feeling.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

When immersion due to mindfulness of breathing has been developed and
cultivated in this way, if they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand
that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it, and that they
don't take pleasure in it. If they feel a painful feeling, they
understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it, and
that they don't take pleasure in it. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it,
and that they don't take pleasure in it.

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a
painful feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they feel it detached. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they
understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of
life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.'
They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right here.'

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. As the oil and
the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed. In
the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand:
'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right here.'"

### N 54.9 At Vesālī *Vesālīsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof. Now at that time the Buddha spoke in many ways to the mendicants
about the meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness
and its development.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, I wish to go on
retreat for a fortnight. No-one should approach me, except for the one
who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then those mendicants thought, "The Buddha spoke in many ways about the
meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness and its
development." They committed themselves to developing the many different
facets of the meditation on ugliness. Becoming horrified, repelled, and
disgusted with this body, they looked for something to take their life.
Each day ten, twenty, or thirty mendicants took their lives.

Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed Ānanda, "Ānanda, why does the mendicant Saṅgha
seem so diminished?"

Ānanda told the Buddha all that had happened, and said, "Sir, please
explain another way for the mendicant Saṅgha to get
enlightened."

"Well then, Ānanda, gather all the mendicants staying in the vicinity of
Vesālī together in the assembly hall."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked, went up to
him, and said, "Sir, the mendicant Saṅgha has assembled.
Please, sir, come at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread
out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
developed and cultivated it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously
pleasant meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities
on the spot whenever they arise.

In the last month of summer, when the dust and dirt is stirred up, a
large sudden storm disperses and settles it on the spot.

In the same way, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
developed and cultivated it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously
pleasant meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities
on the spot whenever they arise. And how is it so developed and
cultivated?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated so that it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously pleasant
meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities on the
spot whenever they arise."

### N 54.10 With Kimbila *Kimilasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then the Buddha
said to Venerable Kimbila, "Kimbila, how is immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very fruitful and
beneficial?"

When he said this, Kimbila kept silent.

For a second time ...

And for a third time, the Buddha said to him, "How is immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very
fruitful and beneficial?" And a second time and a third time Kimbila
kept silent.

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Now is the
time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha speak on
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing. The mendicants will listen
and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and
cultivated so that it is very fruitful and beneficial? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.' That's how
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing, when developed and
cultivated, is very fruitful and beneficial.

There's a time when a mendicant is breathing in heavily, and they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm
breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing
out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the
whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the
whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling physical
processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling physical
processes.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because the breath is a certain
aspect of the body, I say. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing rapture.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing rapture.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing bliss.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing bliss.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mental processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out experiencing the mental processes.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.' At such a time a mendicant
is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Why is that?
Because careful application of mind to the in-breaths and out-breaths is
a certain aspect of feelings, I say. Therefore, at such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
gladdening the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
gladdening the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
immersing the mind in samādhi.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.' At such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
Why is that? Because there is no development of immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing for someone who is unmindful and lacks
awareness, I say. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting go.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. Having seen with wisdom the
giving up of covetousness and displeasure, they watch closely over with
equanimity. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Suppose there was a large heap of sand at the crossroads. And a cart or
chariot were to come by from the east, west, north, or south and destroy
that heap of sand.

In the same way, when a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect
of the body, feelings, mind, or principles, they destroy bad, unskillful
qualities."

## Chapter Two

### N 54.11 Icchānaṅgala *Icchānaṅgalasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. There he addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the
rainy season residence?' You should answer them like this. 'Reverends,
the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the rainy season residence
was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.'

In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out.

Breathing in heavily I know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out
heavily I know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When breathing in lightly I
know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly I know: 'I'm
breathing out lightly.' I know: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole
body.' ...

I know: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' I know: 'I'll breathe
out observing letting go.'

For if anything should be rightly called 'a noble meditation', or else
'a divine meditation', or else 'a realized one's meditation', it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

For those mendicants who are trainees---who haven't achieved their
heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke---the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing leads to the ending of defilements.

For those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---the development
and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to
blissful meditation in this life, and to mindfulness and awareness.

For if anything should be rightly called 'a noble meditation', or else
'a divine meditation', or else 'a realized one's meditation', it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing."

### N 54.12 In Doubt *Kaṅkheyyasutta*

At one time Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then
Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to Venerable
Lomasakaṅgiya, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, is the meditation of a trainee just the same as the
meditation of a realized one? Or is the meditation of a trainee
different from the meditation of a realized one?"

"Reverend Mahānāma, the meditation of a trainee and a
realized one are not the same; they are different. Those mendicants who
are trainees haven't achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring
for the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. They meditate after giving up
the five hindrances. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill
will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

Those who are trainee mendicants ... meditate after giving up the five
hindrances.

Those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---for them, the
five hindrances are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. What five? The
hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

Those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements ...
for them, the five hindrances are cut off at the root ... and unable to
arise in the future. And here's another way to understand how the
meditation of a trainee and a realized one are different.

At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. There he addressed the mendicants,
'Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood.'

'Yes, sir,' replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

'Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
"Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the
rainy season residence?" You should answer them like this: "Reverends,
the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the rainy season residence
was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing."

In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out.

Breathing in heavily I know: "I'm breathing in heavily." Breathing out
heavily I know: "I'm breathing out heavily." ...

I know: "I'll breathe in observing letting go." I know: "I'll breathe
out observing letting go."

For if anything should be rightly called "noble meditation", or else
"divine meditation', or else "a realized one's meditation", it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

For those mendicants who are trainees---who haven't achieved their
heart's desire, but live aspiring for the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke---the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing leads to the ending of defilements.

For those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---the development
and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to
blissful meditation in this very life, and to mindfulness and awareness.

For if anything should be rightly called "noble meditation", or else
"divine meditation', or else "a realized one's meditation", it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.'

This is another way to understand how the meditation of a trainee and a
realized one are different."

### N 54.13 With Ānanda (1st) *Paṭhamaānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills
four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"There is, Ānanda."

"Sir, what is that one thing?"

"Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven
awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and
freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they breathe
in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing
out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing
letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing
letting go.'

There's a time when a mendicant is breathing in heavily, and they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
stilling physical processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
stilling physical processes.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because the
breath is a certain aspect of the body, I say. Therefore, at such a time
a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing rapture ... bliss ... mind ...' ... They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.' At such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
Why is that? Because careful application of mind to the in-breaths and
out-breaths is a certain aspect of feelings, I say. Therefore, at such a
time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
gladdening the mind ... immersing the mind in samādhi ...
freeing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing
the mind.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because there is no development
of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing for someone who is
unmindful and lacks awareness, I say. Therefore, at such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing impermanence ... fading away ... cessation ... letting go.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.' At
such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Having seen with wisdom the giving up of
covetousness and displeasure, they watch closely over with equanimity.
Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? Whenever a
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body, their
mindfulness is established and lucid. At such a time, a mendicant has
activated the awakening factor of mindfulness; they develop it and
perfect it.

As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and
inquire into that principle with wisdom. At such a time, a mendicant has
activated the awakening factor of investigation of principles; they
develop it and perfect it.

As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is
roused up and unflagging. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the
awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it.

When you're energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises. At such a time,
a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop
it and perfect it.

When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
tranquility; they develop it and perfect it.

When the body is tranquil and one feels bliss, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the
awakening factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it.

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
equanimity; they develop it and perfect it.

Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings ...
mind ... principles, their mindfulness is established and lucid. At such
a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of mindfulness;
they develop it and perfect it. ...

**(Tell in full as for the first kind of mindfulness meditation.)**

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
equanimity; they develop it and perfect it. That's how the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the
seven awakening factors.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to fulfill knowledge and freedom? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.14 With Ānanda (2nd) *Dutiyaānandasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, is there one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills four things; and those four things,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven
things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is, Ānanda.

And what is that one thing? Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And
the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill
knowledge and freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.15 Several Mendicants (1st) *Paṭhamabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills
four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"There is, mendicants."

"Sir, what is that one thing?"

"Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven
awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and
freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.16 Several Mendicants (2nd) *Dutiyabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to them:

"Mendicants, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
fulfills four things; and those four things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is, mendicants.

And what is that one thing? Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And
the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill
knowledge and freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.17 Giving Up the Fetters *Saṁyojanappahānasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to giving up the fetters ..."

### N 54.18 Uprooting the Tendencies *Anusayasamugghātasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to uprooting the underlying tendencies ..."

### N 54.19 Completely Understanding the Course of Time *Addhānapariññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to completely understanding the course of time
..."

### N 54.20 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to the ending of defilements. And how is
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as
to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in front of them. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the
underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and
ending the defilements."

**The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness of Breathing is the tenth section.**

