###### 100 Sangarava Sutta

 To Sangarava

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was wan-
dering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.
2. Now on that occasion a brahmin woman named Dhananjani
was staying at Candalakappa, having full confidence in the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha.[917] One time she stum-
bled, and [on recovering her balance] exclaimed three times:
"Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished [210]
and fully enlightened!"
3. At the time there was a brahmin student named Sangarava
staying at Candalakappa. He was a master of the Three Vedas,
with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and
the histories as the fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he
was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a
Great Man. Having heard the brahmin woman Dhananjani utter
those words, he said to her: "This brahmin woman Dhananjani
must be disgraced and degraded, since when there are brahmins
around she praises that bald-pa ted recluse."

[She replied:] "My dear sir, you do not know the virtue and
wisdom of the Blessed One. If you knew that Blessed One's
virtue and wisdom, my dear sir, you would never think of abus-
ing and reviling him."
"Then, madam, inform me when the recluse Gotama comes to
Candalakappa."
"Yes, dear sir," the brahmin woman Dhananjani replied.
4. Then, after wandering by stages in the Kosalan country, the
Blessed One eventually arrived at Candalakappa. There in
Candalakappa the Blessed One lived in the Mango Grove
belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.

5. The brahmin woman Dhananjani heard that the Blessed
One had arrived, so she went to the brahmin student Sangarava
and told him: "My dear sir, the Blessed One has arrived in
Candalakappa and he is living here in Candalakappa in the
Mango Grove belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.
Now is the time, dear sir, to do as you think fit."
"Yes, madam," he replied. Then he went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous [211]
and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:
6. "Master Gotama, there are some recluses and brahmins who
claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after having
reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge
here and now. [918] Where among these recluses and brahmins
does Master Gotama stand?"
7. "Bharadvaja, I say that there is a diversity among those
recluses and brahmins who claim [to teach] the fundamentals of
the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfec-
tion of direct knowledge here and now. There are some recluses
and brahmins who are traditionalists, who on the basis of oral
tradition claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge here and now; such are the brahmins of the Three
Vedas. There are some recluses and brahmins who, entirely on
the basis of mere faith, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the
holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection
of direct knowledge; such are the reasoners and investigators.[919 ]
There are some recluses and brahmins who, having directly
known the Dhamma for themselves[920] among things not heard
before, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge.
8. "I, Bharadvaja, am one of those recluses and brahmins who,
having directly known the Dhamma for themselves among
things not heard before, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the
holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection
of direct knowledge. As to how I am one of those recluses and
brahmins, that may be understood in the following way.
9. "Here, Bharadvaja, before my enlightenment, while I was
still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I considered thus:

'Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide
open. It is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life
utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell. Suppose I shave off
my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from
the home life into homelessness.'
10-13. "Later, Bharadvaja, [212] while still young...(as Sutta 26,
§§14-17)...And I sat down thinking: 'This will serve for striving.'
14-30. "Now these three similes occurred to me spontaneous-
ly never heard before...(as Sutta 36, §§17-33; but in the present
_sutta in §§17-22 - corresponding to §§20-25 of Sutta 36 - the sen-_
_tence "But such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade_
my mind and remain" does not occur)...the five bhikkhus were
disgusted and left me, thinking: 'The recluse Gotama now lives
luxuriously; he has given up his striving and reverted to luxu-
ry.'
31-41. "Now when I had eaten solid food and regained my
strength, then quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states...(as Sutta 36, §§34r-44; but in the pre-
_sent sutta in §§36, 38, and 41 - corresponding to §§39, 41, and 44 of_
_Sutta 36 - the sentence "But such pleasant feeling that arose in me_
did not invade my mind and remain" does not occur)...as hap-
pens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute."
42. When this was said, the brahmin student Sangarava said to
the Blessed One: "Master Gotama's striving was unfaltering,
Master Gotama's striving was that of a true man, as it should be
for an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One. But how is
it, Master Gotama, are there gods?"
"It is known to me to be the case, Bharadvaja, that there are
gods."
"But how is this, Master Gotama, that when you are asked,
'Are there gods?' you say: 'It is known to me to be the case,
Bharadvaja, that there are gods'? If that is so, isn't what you say
empty and false?"[921 ]

"Bharadvaja, when one is asked, 'Are there gods?' [213]
whether one answers, "There are gods/ or 'It is known to me to
be the case [that there are gods]/ a wise man can draw the defi-
nite conclusion that there are gods."
"But why didn't Master Gotama answer me in the first way?"
"It is widely accepted in the world, Bharadvaja, that there
are gods."

43. When this was said, the brahmin student Sangarava said to
the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."


