###### 106 Anenjasappaya Sutta

 The Way to the Imperturbable

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD.[1007] On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Kuru country at a town of the Kurus named
Kammasadhamma. There the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir," they replied. The
Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, sensual pleasures[1008] are impermanent, hollow,
false, deceptive; they are illusory, the prattle of fools. Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,

[262] sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions
in lives to come - both alike are Mara's realm, Mara's domain,
Mara's bait, Mara's hunting ground. On account of them, these
evil unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will,
and presumption arise, and they constitute an obstruction to a
noble disciple in training here.

(THE IMPERTURBABLE)

3. "Therein, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to
come...constitute an obstruction to a noble disciple in training
here. Suppose I were to abide with a mind abundant and exalt-
ed, having transcended the world and made a firm resolution
with the mind. [1009] When I do so, there will be no more evil
unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will, and
presumption in me, and with the abandoning of them my mind
will be unlimited, immeasurable, and well developed.' When he
practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind
acquires confidence in this base. [1010] Once there is full confi-
dence, he either attains to the imperturbable now or else he
decides upon [perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the

body, after death, it is possible that this consciousness of his,
leading [to rebirth], may pass on [to rebirth] in the imper-
turbable. [1011] This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the first way
directed to the imperturbable.
4. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: [1012] '[There
are] sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in
lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual
perceptions in lives to come; whatever material form [there is],
all material form is the four great elements and the material
form derived from the four great elements.' When he practises
in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confi-
dence in this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains
to the imperturbable now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possi-
ble that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass
on [to rebirth] in the imperturbable. This, bhikkhus, is declared
to be the second way directed to the imperturbable. [263]
5. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: [1 0 1 3 ]
'Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives
to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual percep-
tions in lives to come, material forms here and now and material
forms in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and
perceptions of forms in lives to come - both alike are imperma-
nent. What is impermanent is not worth delighting in, not worth
welcoming, not worth holding to.' When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
imperturbable now or else he decides upon [perfecting] wis-
dom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible
that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass on

[to rebirth] in the imperturbable. This, bhikkhus, is declared to
be the third way directed to the imperturbable.

(THE BASE OF NOTHINGNESS)

6. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: [1014] 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,
sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in
lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms
in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and

perceptions of forms in lives to come, and perceptions of the
imperturbable - all are perceptions. Where these perceptions
cease without remainder, that is the peaceful, that is the sub-
lime, namely, the base of nothingness.' When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
base of nothingness now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possi-
ble that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass
on [to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This, bhikkhus, is
declared to be the first way directed to the base of nothingness.
7. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple, gone to the forest or to
the root of a tree or to an empty hut, considers thus: 'This is void
of a self or of what belongs to a self.' [1015] When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
base of nothingness now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible
that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass on

[to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This, bhikkhus, is declared
to be the second way directed to the base of nothingness.
8. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'I am not
anything belonging to anyone anywhere, [264] nor is there any-
thing belonging to me in anyone anywhere.'[1016] When he prac-
tises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires
confidence in this base. Once there is full confidence, he either
attains to the base of nothingness now or else he decides upon

[perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death,
it is possible that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth],
may pass on [to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This,
bhikkhus, is declared to be the third way directed to the base of
nothingness.

(THE BASE OF NEITHER-PERCEPTION-NOR-NON-PERCEPTION)

9. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,
sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in
lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms
in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and

perceptions of forms in lives to come, perceptions of the imper-
turbable, and perceptions of the base of nothingness - all are per-
ceptions. Where these perceptions cease without remainder, that
is the peaceful, that is the sublime, namely, the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception.' When he practises in this way
and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this
base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception now or else he decides
upon [perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after
death, it is possible that this consciousness of his, leading [to
rebirth], may pass on [to rebirth] in the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception. This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the way
directed to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception."

(NIBBANA)

10. When this was said, the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, here a bhikkhu is practising thus:
'If it were not, it would not be mine; it will not be and it will not
be mine. What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandon-
ing.' [1017] Thus he obtains equanimity.[1018] Venerable sir, does such
a bhikkhu attain Nibbana?"
"One bhikkhu here, Ananda, might attain Nibbana, another
bhikkhu here might not attain Nibbana."
"What is the cause and reason, venerable sir, why one
bhikkhu here might attain Nibbana, while another bhikkhu here
might not attain Nibbana?"
"Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu is practising thus: 'If it were not, it
would not be mine; it will not be and it will hot be mine. What
exists, [265] what has come to be, that I am abandoning.' Thus
he obtains equanimity. He delights in that equanimity, wel-
comes it, and remains holding to it. As he does so, his conscious-
ness becomes dependent on it and clings to it. A bhikkhu,
Ananda, who is affected by clinging does not attain Nibbana."
11. "But, venerable sir, when that bhikkhu clings, what does
he cling to?"
"To the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
Ananda."
"When that bhikkhu clings, venerable sir, it seems he clings to
the best [object of] clinging."

"When that bhikkhu clings, Ananda, he clings to the best

[object of] clinging; for this is the best [object of] clinging, name-
ly, the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.[1019 ]
12. "Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu is practising thus: 'If it were
not, it would not be mine; it will not be and it will not be mine.
What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning.' Thus
he obtains equanimity. He does not delight in that equanimity,
welcome it, or remain holding to it. Since he does not do so, his
consciousness does not become dependent on it and does not
cling to it. A bhikkhu, Ananda, who is without clinging attains
Nibbana."
13. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous! The Blessed
One, indeed, has explained to us the crossing of the flood in
dependence upon one support or another.[1020] But, venerable sir,
what is noble liberation?"[1021 ]

"Here, Ananda, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual plea-
sures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sen-
sual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives
to come, material forms here and now and material forms in
lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and percep-
tions of forms in lives to come, perceptions of the imperturbable,
perceptions of the base of nothingness, and perceptions of the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception - this is personal-
ity as far as personality extends.[1022] This is the Deathless, name-
ly, the liberation of the mind through not clinging.'[1023 ]

14. "Thus, Ananda, I have taught the way directed to the
imperturbable, I have taught the way directed to the base of
nothingness, I have taught the way directed to the base of nei-
ther-perception-nor-non-perception, I have taught the crossing
of the flood in dependence upon one support or another, I haye
taught noble liberation.
15. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, [266] that I have done for you, Ananda. There are these
roots of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Ananda, do not delay,
or else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
