###### 110 Culapunnama Sutta

 The Shorter Discourse on the

 Full-moon Night

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at Savatthl in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's Mother.
2. On that occasion - the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the
full-moon night - [21] the Blessed One was seated in the open
surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus. Then, surveying the
silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:
3. "Bhikkhus, would an untrue man [1 0 4 5] know of an untrue
man: 'This person is an untrue man'?" - "No, venerable sir." -
"Good, bhikkhus. It is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue
man should know of an untrue man: 'This person is an untrue
man.' But would an untrue man know of a true man: 'This per-
son is a true man'?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Good, bhikkhus. It
is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue man should know of a
true man: 'This person is a true man.'
4. "Bhikkhus, an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities; he
associates as an untrue ijian, he wills as an untrue man, he coun-
sels as an untrue man, he speaks as an untrue man, he acts as an
untrue man, he holds views as an untrue man, and he gives gifts
as an untrue man.
5. "And how is an untrue man possessed of bad qualities?
Here an untrue man has no faith, no shame, no fear of wrong-
doing; he is unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise. That is how
an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities.
6. "And how does an untrue man associate as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man has for friends and companions those
recluses and brahmins who have no faith, no shame, no fear of
wrongdoing; who are unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise.
That is how an untrue man associates as an untrue man.
7. "And how does an untrue man will as an untrue man? Here

an untrue man wills for his own affliction, for the affliction of
others, and for the affliction of both. That is how an untrue man
wills as an untrue man.
8. "And how does an untrue man counsel as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man counsels for his own affliction, for the
affliction of others, and for the affliction of both. [22] That is
how an untrue man counsels as an untrue man.
9. "And how does an untrue man speak as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man speaks false speech, malicious speech,
harsh speech, and gossip. That is how an untrue man speaks as
an untrue man.
10. "And how does an untrue man act as an untrue man? Here
an untrue man kills living beings, takes what is not given, and
misconducts himself in sensual pleasures. That is how an untrue
man acts as an untrue man.
11. "And how does an untrue man hold views as an untrue
man? Here an untrue man holds such a view as this: 'There is
nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or
result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no
mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare
this world and the other world.' That is how an untrue man
holds views as an untrue man.
12. "And how does an untrue man give gifts as an untrue
man? Here an untrue man gives a gift carelessly, gives it not
with his own hand, gives it without showing respect, gives what
is to be discarded, gives it with the view that nothing will come
of it. That is how an untrue man gives gifts as an untrue man.
13. "That untrue man - thus possessed of bad qualities, who
thus associates as an untrue man, wills as an untrue man, coun-
sels as an untrue man, speaks as an untrue man, acts as an
untrue man, holds views as an untrue man, and gives gifts as an
untrue man - on the dissolution of the body, after death, reap-
pears in the destination of untrue men. And what is the destina-
tion of untrue men? It is hell or the animal world.
14. "Bhikkhus, would a true man know of a true man: 'This
person is a true man'?" [23] - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Good,
bhikkhus. It is possible that a true man would know of a true

man: 'This person is a true man.' But would a true man know of
an untrue man: 'This person is an untrue man'?" - "Yes, venera-
ble sir." - "Good, bhikkhus. It is possible that a true man would
know of an untrue man: 'This person is an untrue man.'
15. "Bhikkhus, a true man is possessed of good qualities; he
associates as a true man, he wills as a true man, he counsels as a
true man, he speaks as a true man, he acts as a true man, he
holds views as a true man, and he gives gifts as a true man.
16. "And how is a true man possessed of good qualities? Here
a true man has faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; he is
learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. That is how a true man is
possessed of good qualities.
17. "And how does a true man associate as a true man? Here a
true man has for his friends and companions those recluses and
brahmins who have faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; who
are learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. That is how a true
man associates as a true man.
18. "And how does a true man will as a true man? Here a true
man does not will for his own affliction, for the affliction of
others, or for the affliction of both. That is how a true man wills
as a true man.
19. "And how does a true man counsel as a true man? Here a
true man does not counsel for his own affliction, for the afflic-
tion of others, or for the affliction of both. That is how a true
man counsels as a true man.
20. "And how does a true man speak as a true man? Here a
true man abstains from false speech, from malicious speech,
from harsh speech, and from gossip. That is how a true man
speaks as a true man.
21. "And how does a true man act as a true man? Here a true
man abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not
given, [24] and from misconduct in sensual pleasures. That is
how a true man acts as a true man.
22. "And how does a true man hold views as a true man? Here
a true man holds such a view as this: 'There is what is given and
what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of
good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world;
there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn
spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brah-
mins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct

knowledge and declare this world and the other world.' That is
how a true man holds views as a true man.
23. "And how does a true man give gifts as a true man? Here a
true man gives a gift carefully, gives it with his own hand, gives
it showing respect, gives a valuable gift, gives it with the view
that something will come of it. That is how a true man gives
gifts as a true man.
24. "That true man - thus possessed of good qualities, who
thus associates as a true man, wills as a true man, counsels as a
true man, speaks as a true man, acts as a true man, holds views
as a true man, and gives gifts as a true man - on the dissolution
of the body, after death, reappears in the destination of true
men. And what is the destination of true men? It is greatness
among the gods or greatness among human beings."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

-----

###### The Division of One by One

 (Anupadavagga)

_I Hi':_

**l l**

   - H

###### I l l Anupada Sutta

 One by One As They Occurred

[25] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable, sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, Sariputta is wise; Sariputta has great wisdom;
Sariputta has wide wisdom; Sariputta has joyous wisdom;
Sariputta has quick wisdom; Sariputta has keen wisdom;
Sariputta has penetrative wisdom. During half a month,
bhikkhus, Sariputta had insight into states one by one as they
occurred.[1046] Now Sariputta's insight into states one by one as
they occurred was this:
3. "Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, Sariputta entered upon and
abided in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
4. "And the states in the first jhana - the applied thought, the
sustained thought, the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they
occurred;[1047] known to him those states arose, known they were
present, known they disappeared. He understood thus: 'So
indeed, these states, not having been, come into being; having
been, they vanish.' Regarding those states, he abided unattract-
ed, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a
mind rid of barriers. [1048] He understood: 'There is an escape
beyond,' and with the cultivation of that [attainment], he con-
firmed that there is. [1 0 4 9 ]

5. "Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, Sariputta entered and abided in [26] the second jhana,

which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of concentration.
6. "And the states in the second jhana - the self-confidence,
the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification of mind; the con-
tact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision,
energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these states
were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him
those states arose, known they were present, known they disap-
peared. He understood thus:...and with the cultivation of that

[attainment], he confirmed that there is.
7. "Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture,
Sariputta abided in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware,
still feeling pleasure with the body, he entered upon and abided
in the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce:
'He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.'
8. "And the states in the third jhana - the equanimity, the
pleasure, the mindfulness, the full awareness, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present,
known they disappeared. He understood thus:...and with the
cultivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.
9. "Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief,
Sariputta entered upon and abided in the fourth jhana, which
has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity.
10. "And the states in the fourth jhana - the equanimity, the
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, the mental unconcern due
to tranquillity,[1050] the purity of mindfulness, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present, [27]
known they disappeared. He understood thus:...and with the
cultivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.
11. "Again, bhikkhus, with the complete surmounting of
perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of

sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite,' Sariputta entered upon and abided
in the base of infinite space.
12. "And the states in the base of infinite space - the percep-
tion of the base of infinite space and the unification of mind; the
contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, deci-
sion, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these
states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known
to him those states arose, known they were present, known they
disappeared. He understood thus:...and with the cultivation of
that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.
13. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' Sariputta
entered upon and abided in the base of infinite consciousness.
14. "And the states in the base of infinite consciousness - the
perception of the base of infinite consciousness and the unifica-
tion of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind;
the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention

    - these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present,
known they disappeared. He understood thus:.. .and with the cul-
tivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is. [28]
15. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' Sariputta
entered upon and abided in the base of nothingness.
16. "And the states in the base of nothingness - the perception
of the base of nothingness and the unification of mind; the con-
tact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision,
energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these states
were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to
him those states arose, known they were present, known they
disappeared. He understood thus:...and with the cultivation of
that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.
17. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
nothingness, Sariputta entered upon and abided in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
18. "He emerged mindful from that attainment. Having done
so, he contemplated the past states, which had ceased and
changed, thus: 'So indeed, these states, not having been, come
into being; having been, they vanish.'[1051] Regarding those states,

he abided unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free,
dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers. He understood: 'There
is an escape beyond/ and with the cultivation of that [attain-
ment], he confirmed that there is.
19. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, Sariputta entered upon
and abided in the cessation of perception and feeling. And his
taints were destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.[1052 ]

20. "He emerged mindful from that attainment. Having done
so, he recalled the past states, which had ceased and changed,
thus: 'So indeed, these states, not having been, come into being;
having been, they vanish.'[1053] Regarding those states, he abided
unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated,
with a mind rid of barriers. He understood: 'There is no escape
beyond,' and with the cultivation of that [attainment], he con-
firmed that there is not. [1054 ]

21. "Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone:
'He has attained mastery and perfection[1055] in noble virtue, [29]
attained mastery and perfection in noble concentration, attained
mastery and perfection in noble wisdom, attained mastery and
perfection in noble deliverance,' it is of Sariputta indeed that
rightly speaking this should be said.
22. "Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone:
'He is the son of the Blessed One, born of his breast, born of his
mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, an heir in
the Dhamma, not an heir in material things/ it is of Sariputta
indeed that rightly speaking this should be said.
23. "Bhikkhus, the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma set rolling
by the Tathagata is kept rolling rightly by Sariputta."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
