###### 114 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta

 To Be Cultivated and Not To Be

 Cultivated

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on what should be
cultivated and what should not be cultivated. Listen and attend
closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus
replied. The Blessed One said this:

(FIRST EXPOSITION)

3. "Bhikkhus,[1069] bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either
the one or the other. [1070] Verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to
be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is
either the one or the other. Mental conduct is of two kinds, I say:
to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is
either the one or the other. Inclination of mind is of two kinds,
I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And inclination'
of mind is either the one or the other. [46] The acquisition of
perception is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be
cultivated. And the acquisition of perception is either the one or
the other. The acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of view is
either the one or the other. The acquisition of individuality is of
two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And
the acquisition of individuality is either the one or the other."

(FIRST ELABORATION)

4. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
5. '"Bhikkhus, bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such bodily conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such bodily conduct as
causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.
"And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states
to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous,
bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living
beings. He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the
wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest. He
misconducts himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse
with such women as are protected by their mother, father, mother
and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband,
who are protected by law, and even with those who are garlanded
in token of betrothal. Such bodily conduct [47] causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it.
"And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings,
abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid
aside, gently and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living
beings. Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains
from taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft
the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from
misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse
with such women as are protected by their mother, father, mother
and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband,

who are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in
token of betrothal. Such bodily conduct causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either the
one or the other.'
6. '"Bhikkhus, verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such verbal conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such verbal conduct as
causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.
"And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned
to a court, or to a meeting, [48] or to his relatives' presence, or
to his guild, or to the royal family's presence, and questioned as
a witness thus: 'So, good man, tell what you know,' not know-
ing, he says, 'I know,' or knowing, he says, 'I do not know'; not
seeing, he says, 'I see,' or seeing, he says, 'I do not see'; in full
awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another's
ends, or for some trifling worldly end. He speaks maliciously;
he repeats elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide

[those people] from these, or he repeats to these people what he
has heard elsewhere in order to divide [these people] from
those; thus he is one who divides those who are united, a cre-
ator of divisions, who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord,
delights in discord, a speaker of words that create discord. He
speaks harshly; he utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful
to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive
to concentration. He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time,
speaks what is not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary
to the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the wrong time he
speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, immoder-
ate, and unbeneficial. Such verbal conduct causes unwholesome

states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it.
"And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from
false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to
his relatives' presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family's
presence, and questioned as a witness thus: 'So, good man, tell
what you know/ not knowing, he says, 'I do not know,' or
knowing, he says, 'I know'; not seeing, he says, 'I do not see,' or
seeing, he says, 'I see'; [49] he does not in full awareness speak
falsehood for his own ends, or for another's ends, or for some
trifling worldly end. Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains
from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he
has heard here in order to divide [those people] from these, nor
does he repeat to these people what he has heard elsewhere in
order to divide [these people] from those; thus he is one who
reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who
enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker
of words that promote concord. Abandoning harsh speech, he
abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle,
pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courte-
ous, desired by many, and agreeable to many. Abandoning gos-
sip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks
what is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma
and the Discipline; at the right time he speaks such words as are
worth recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial. Such ver-
bal conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and whole-
some states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is either the
one or the other.'
7. '"Mental conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and
not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is either the one or the
other.' So it was said by the Blessed One, And with reference to
what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such mental conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such mental conduct

as causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states
to increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.
"And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth
and property of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs to another
be mine!' Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate [50]
thus: 'May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be
cut off, perish, or be annihilated!' Such mental conduct causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it.
"And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet
the wealth and property of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs
to another be mine!' His mind is without ill will and he has
intentions free from hate thus: 'May these beings be free from
enmity, affliction, and anxiety! May they live happily!' Such
mental conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, mental conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is either
the one or the other.'[1071 ]

8. '"Inclination of mind is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated. And inclination of mind is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
_reference to what was this said?_
"Venerable sir, such inclination of mind as causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in
one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such inclina-
tion of mind as causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it should be
cultivated.
"And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is covetous and abides with his
mind imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides with
his mind imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides with his
mind imbued with cruelty.[1072] Such inclination of mind causes

unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it.
"And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase [51] in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is uncovetous and abides with
his mind detached from covetousness; he is without ill will and
abides with his mind detached from ill will; he is uncruel and
abides with his mind detached from cruelty. Such inclination of
mind causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome
states to increase in one who cultivates it.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, inclination of mind is of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. And inclination of mind is
either the one or the other.'
9. '"The acquisition of perception is of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of per-
ception is either the one or the other.' So it was said by the
Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such acquisition of perception as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish
in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such
acquisition of perception as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.
"And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is covetous and abides with his
perception imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides
with his perception imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides
with his perception imbued with cruelty. Such acquisition of
perception causes unwholesome states to increase and whole-
some states to diminish in one who cultivates it.
"And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwhole-
some states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is uncovetous and abides with
his perception detached from covetousness; he is without ill will
and abides with his perception detached from ill will; he is uncruel
and abides with his perception detached from cruelty. Such
acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to diminish
and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of perception is of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisi-
tion of perception is either the one or the other.' [52]
10. '"The acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of view is
either the one or the other/ So it was said by the Blessed One.
And with reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such acquisition of view as causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in
one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such acquisi-
tion of view as causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it should be
cultivated.
"And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone holds such a view as this: "There is
nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or
result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no
mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare
this world and the other world.' Such acquisition of view causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish
in one who cultivates it.
"And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it? Here someone holds such a view as this: "There is
what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is
fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and
the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who
are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses
and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by
direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.'
Such acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to diminish
and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to
be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of
view is either the one or the other.'

11. '"The acquisition of individuality is of two kinds, I say: [1073 ]
to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of
individuality is either the one or the other.' So it was said by the
Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, [53] such acquisition of individuality as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such
acquisition of individuality as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.
"And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it? When a person generates an acquisition of indi-
viduality that is subject to affliction, unwholesome states increase
and wholesome states diminish in him, preventing him from
putting an end to being.[1074 ]

"And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwhole-
some states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one
who cultivates it? When a person generates an acquisition of indi-
viduality that is free from affliction, unwholesome states diminish
and wholesome states increase in him, enabling him to put an end
to being.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of individuality is of two kinds,
I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisi-
tion of individuality is either the one or the other.'
12. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.".

(FIRST APPROVAL AND RECAPITULATION)

13. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
14-20. [54, 55] {In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim
_§§5-11, with the substitution of "Sariputta" for "venerable sir" and_
_of" by me" for "by the Blessed One.")_
21. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.

(SECOND EXPOSITION)

22. "Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: [56] to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.[1075] Sounds
cognizable by the ear are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated. Odours cognizable by the nose are of
two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Flavours cognizable by the tongue are of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. Tangibles cognizable by the
body are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be culti-
vated. Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated."

(SECOND ELABORATION)

23. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
24. '"Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: [56] to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.' So it was said
by the Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such forms cognizable by the eye as cause
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates them should not be cultivated. But
such forms cognizable by the eye as cause unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates them should be cultivated.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.'
25. '"Sounds cognizable by the ear are of two kinds, I say'...
26. '"Odours cognizable by the nose are of two kinds, I say'... [57]
27. '"Flavours cognizable by the tongue are of two kinds, I say'...
28. '"Tangibles cognizable by the body are of two kinds, I say'...
29. "'Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.' So it was said by
the Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, such mind-objects cognizable by the mind as
cause unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to

diminish in one who cultivates them should not be cultivated.

[58] But such mind-objects cognizable by the mind as cause
unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates them should be cultivated.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.'
30. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus."

(SECOND APPROVAL AND RECAPITULATION)

31. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
32-37. (In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim §§24r-29,
_with the necessary substitutions.)_
38. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.

(THIRD EXPOSITION)

39. "Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and
not to be cultivated. Almsfood is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. Resting places are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. Villages are of two
kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. Towns are
of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Cities are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be culti-
vated. Districts are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not
to be cultivated. Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated." [59]
40. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:
41. '"Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And
with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such robes as cause unwholesome states to
increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates
them should not be cultivated. But such robes as cause
unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates them should be cultivated.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated.'
42. '"Almsfood is of two kinds, I say'...
43. '"Resting places are of two kinds, I say'...
44. '"Villages are of two kinds, I say'...
45. '"Towns are of two kinds, I say'...
46. '"Cities are of two kinds, I say'...
47. '"Districts are of two kinds, I say'...
48. '"Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not
to be cultivated.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?
"Venerable sir, [association with] such persons as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But [associ-
ation with] such persons as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to
be cultivated.'
49. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus."

(THIRD APPROVAL AND RECAPITULATION)

50. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.
51-58. (In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim §§41-48
_with the necessary substitutions.) [60]_
59. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.

(CONCLUSION)

60. "Sariputta, if all nobles understood thus the detailed mean-
ing of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to
their welfare and happiness for a long time. [1 0 7 6] If all brah-
mins... all merchants...all workers understood thus the mean-
ing of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to
their welfare and happiness for a long time. If the world with
its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with its
recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, understood
thus the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in
brief, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world
for a long time." [61]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
