###### 137 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta

 The Exposition of the Sixfold Base

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of the sixfold
base. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, vener-
able sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this: [216]
3. "The six internal bases should be understood. The six exter-
nal bases should be understood. The six classes of conscious-
ness should be understood. The six classes of contact should be
understood. The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be
understood. The thirty-six positions of beings should be under-
stood. Therein, by depending on this, abandon that. There are
three foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates,
cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a
group. Among the teachers of training it is he that is called the
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed. This is the summa-
ry of the exposition of the sixfold base.
4. '"The six internal bases should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-
base, and the mind-base. So it was with reference to this that it
was said: 'The six internal bases should be understood.'
5. '"The six external bases should be understood.' So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said? There are the form-
base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the tangi-
ble-base, and the mind-object-base. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: 'The six external bases should be understood.'
6. '"The six classes of consciousness should be understood.' So
it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There are

eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness,
tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, and mind-
consciousness. So it was with reference to this that it was said:
'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.'
7. "'The six classes of contact should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are eye-
contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact,
and mind-contact. So it was with reference to this that it was
said: 'The six classes of contact should be understood.'
8. '"The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be under-
stood.'[1235] So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?
"On seeing a form with the eye, one explores a form produc-
tive of joy, one explores a form productive of grief, one explores
a form productive of equanimity.[1236] On hearing a sound with
the ear...On smelling an odour with the nose...On tasting a
flavour with the tongue...[217] On touching a tangible with the
body.. .On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, one explores a
mind-object productive of joy, one explores a mind-object pro-
ductive of grief, one explores a mind-object productive of equa-
nimity. Thus there are six kinds of exploration with joy, six kinds
of exploration with grief, and six kinds of exploration with equa-
nimity. So it was with reference to this that it was said: "The eigh-
teen kinds of mental exploration should be understood.'
9. ""The thirty-six positions of beings should be understood.'[1237 ]
So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There
are six kinds of joy based on the household life and six kinds of
joy based on renunciation.[1238] There are six kinds of grief based
on the household life and six kinds of grief based on renunciation.
There are six kinds of equanimity based on the household life and
six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation.
10. "Herein, what are the six kinds of joy based on the house-
hold life? When one regards as an acquisition the acquisition of
forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agree-
able, gratifying, and associated with worldliness - or when one
recalls what was formerly acquired that has passed, ceased, and
changed - joy arises. Such joy as this is called joy based on the
household life.
"When one regards as an acquisition the acquisition of sounds
cognizable by the ear...the acquisition of odours cognizable by
the nose.. .the acquisition of flavours cognizable by the tongue...

the acquisition of tangibles cognizable by the body.. .the acquisi-
tion of mind-objects cognizable by the mind that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness -
or when one recalls what was formerly acquired that has
passed, ceased, and changed - joy arises. Such joy as this is
called joy based on the household life. These are the six kinds of
joy based on the household life.
11. "Herein, what are the six kinds of joy based on renuncia-
tion? When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading
away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with
proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, joy arises. Such joy as
this is called joy based on renunciation.[1239 ]

"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds...of odours...of flavours...of tangi-
bles.. .[218] of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper
wisdom that mind-objects both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, joy arises. Such joy as
this is called joy based on renunciation. These are the six kinds
of joy based on renunciation.
12. "Herein, what are the six kinds of grief based on the
household life? When one regards as a non-acquisition the non-
acquisition of forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness -
or when one recalls what was formerly not acquired that has
passed, ceased, and changed - grief arises. Such grief as this is
called grief based on the household life.
"When one regards as a non-acquisition the non-acquisition of
sounds cognizable by the ear...the non-acquisition of odours
cognizable by the nose...the non-acquisition of flavours cogniz-
able by the tongue...the non-acquisition of tangibles cognizable
by the body...the non-acquisition of mind-objects cognizable by
the mind that are wished for, desired, agreeable, gratifying, and
associated with worldliness - or when one recalls what was for-
merly not acquired that has passed, ceased, and changed - grief
arises. Such grief as this is called grief based on the household
life. These are the six kinds of grief based on the household life.
13. "Herein, what are the six kinds of grief based on renuncia-
tion? When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading
away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with

proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, one generates a longing
for the supreme liberations thus: 'When shall I enter upon and
abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide
in?' [1240] In one who generates thus a longing for the supreme lib-
erations, grief arises with that longing as condition. Such grief as
this is called grief based on renunciation.
"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds...of odours...of flavours...of tangibles
...of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom
that mind-objects both formerly and now are all impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change, [219] one generates a longing
for the supreme liberations thus: 'When shall I enter upon and
abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide
in?' In one who thus generates a longing for the supreme libera-
tions, grief arises with that longing as condition. Such grief as
this is called grief based on renunciation. These are the six kinds
of grief based on renunciation.
14. "Herein, what are the six kinds of equanimity based on the
household life? On seeing a form with the eye, equanimity aris-
es in a foolish infatuated ordinary person, in an untaught ordi-
nary person who has not conquered his limitations or con-
quered the results [of action] and who is blind to danger. Such
equanimity as this does not transcend the form; that is why it is
called equanimity based on the household life. [1241 ]

"On hearing a sound with the ear.. .On smelling an odour with
the nose...On tasting a flavour with the tongue...On touching a
tangible with the body...On cognizing a mind-object with the
mind, equanimity arises in a foolish infatuated ordinary person,
in an untaught ordinary person who has not conquered his limi-
tations or conquered the results [of action] and who is blind "to
danger. Such equanimity as this does not transcend the mind-
object; that is why it is called equanimity based on the house-
hold life. These are the six kinds of equanimity based on the
household life.
15. "Herein, what are the six kinds of equanimity based on
renunciation? When, by knowing the impermanence, change,
fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is
with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all
impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, equanimity

arises. Such equanimity as this transcends the form; that is why
it is called equanimity based on renunciation.[1242 ]
"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds...of odours.. .of flavours.. .of tangibles...
of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom
that mind-objects both formerly and now are all impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change, equanimity arises. Such equa-
nimity as this transcends the mind-object; that is why it is called
equanimity based on renunciation. These are the six kinds of
equanimity based on renunciation.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'The thirty-
six positions of beings should be understood.' [220]
16. '"Therein, by depending on this, abandon that.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said?
"Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on the six kinds of
joy based on renunciation, abandon and surmount the six kinds
of joy based on the household life. It is thus they are abandoned;
it is thus they are surmounted. By depending and relying on the
six lands of grief based on renunciation, abandon and surmount
the six kinds of grief based on the household life. It is thus they
are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted. By depending
and relying on the six kinds of equanimity based on renuncia-
tion, abandon and surmount the six kinds of equanimity based
on the household life. It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus
they are surmounted.
"By depending and relying on the six lands of joy based on
renunciation, abandon and surmount the six kinds of grief
based on renunciation. It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus
they are surmounted. By depending and relying on the six kinds
of equanimity based on renunciation, abandon and surmount
the six kinds of joy based on renunciation. It is thus they are
abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.
17. "There is, bhikkhus, equanimity that is diversified, based on
diversity; and there is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.[1243 ]

18. "And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity? There is equanimity regarding forms,
sounds, odours, flavours, and tangibles. This, bhikkhus, is equa-
nimity that is diversified, based on diversity.
19. "And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based
on unity? There is equanimity regarding the base of infinite

space, the base of infinite consciousness, the base of nothing-
ness, and the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
20. "Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on equanimity
that is unified, based on unity, abandon and surmount equanimi-
ty that is diversified, based on diversity. It is thus this is aban-
doned; it is thus this is surmounted.[1244 ]
"Bhikkhus, by depending and relying on non-identification,[1245 ]
abandon and surmount equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted. [221]
"So it was in reference to this that it was said: 'Therein, by
depending on this, abandon that.'
21. '"There are three foundations of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group.' [1246] So it was said. And with refer-
ence to what was this said?
22. "Here, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their welfare,
the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of compas-
sion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.' His
disciples do not want to hear or give ear or exert their minds to
understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher's Dispen-
sation. With that the Tathagata is not satisfied and feels no satis-
faction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware. This,
bhikkhus, is called the first foundation of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group.
23. "Furthermore, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their
welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of
compassion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.'
Some of his disciples will not hear or give ear or exert their
minds to understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher's
Dispensation. Some of his disciples will hear and give ear and
exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside
from the Teacher's Dispensation. With that the Tathagata is not
satisfied and feels no satisfaction, and he is not dissatisfied and
feels no dissatisfaction; remaining free from both satisfaction
and dissatisfaction, he dwells in equanimity, mindful, and fully
aware. This, bhikkhus, is called the second foundation of mind-
fulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the
Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.

24. "Furthermore, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their
welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of
compassion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.'
His disciples will hear and give ear and exert their minds to
understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher's
Dispensation. With that the Tathagata is satisfied and feels satisfaction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware. This,
bhikkhus, is called the third foundation of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group. [222]
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: "There are three
foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.'
25. '"Among the teachers of training it is he that is called the
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed.' [1247] So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said?
"Guided by the elephant tamer, bhikkhus, the elephant to be
tamed goes in one direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided
by the horse tamer, bhikkhus, the horse to be tamed goes in one
direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided by the ox tamer,
bhikkhus, the ox to be tamed goes in one direction - east, west,
north, or south.
26. "Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in eight directions.[1248 ]
"Possessed of material form, he sees forms: this is the first
direction. Not perceiving forms internally, he sees forms externally: this is the second direction. He is resolved only upon the
beautiful: this is the third direction. With the complete surmounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of
perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions
of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite,' he enters upon and
abides in the base of infinite space: this is the fourth direction.
By completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite,' he enters upon and abides in the
base of infinite consciousness: this is the fifth direction. By completely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware
that 'there is nothing,' he enters upon and abides in the base of
nothingness: this is the sixth direction. By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, he enters upon and abides in the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception: this is the seventh


24. "Furthermore, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their
welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of
compassion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.'
His disciples will hear and give ear and exert their minds to
understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher's
Dispensation. With that the Tathagata is satisfied and feels satis-
faction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware. This,
bhikkhus, is called the third foundation of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group. [222]
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: "There are three
foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivat-
ing which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.'
25. '"Among the teachers of training it is he that is called the
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed.' [1247] So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said?
"Guided by the elephant tamer, bhikkhus, the elephant to be
tamed goes in one direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided
by the horse tamer, bhikkhus, the horse to be tamed goes in one
direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided by the ox tamer,
bhikkhus, the ox to be tamed goes in one direction - east, west,
north, or south.
26. "Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in eight directions.[1248 ]
"Possessed of material form, he sees forms: this is the first
direction. Not perceiving forms internally, he sees forms exter-
nally: this is the second direction. He is resolved only upon the
beautiful: this is the third direction. With the complete sur-
mounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of
perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions
of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite,' he enters upon and
abides in the base of infinite space: this is the fourth direction.
By completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite,' he enters upon and abides in the
base of infinite consciousness: this is the fifth direction. By com-
pletely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware
that 'there is nothing,' he enters upon and abides in the base of
nothingness: this is the sixth direction. By completely surmount-
ing the base of nothingness, he enters upon and abides in the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception: this is the seventh

direction. By completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, he enters upon and abides in the
cessation of perception and feelirig: this is the eighth direction.
"Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in these eight directions.
28. "So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'Among
the teachers of training it is he that is called the incomparable
leader of persons to be tamed.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
