###### 141 Saccavibhanga Sutta

 The Exposition of the Truths

[248] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Benares in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma,[1288] which cannot be stopped
by any recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone
in the world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing,
establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of the Four
Noble Truths. Of what four?
3. "The announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, reveal-
ing, expounding, and exhibiting of the noble truth of suffering.
The announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing,
expounding, and exhibiting of the noble truth of the origin of
suffering...of the noble truth of the cessation of suffering...of
the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
4. "At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by any
recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone in the
world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, establishing,
revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four Noble Truths.
5. "Cultivate the friendship of Sariputta and Moggallana,
bhikkhus; associate with Sariputta and Moggallana. They are
wise and helpful to their companions in the holy life. Sariputta is
like a mother; Moggallana is like a nurse. Sariputta trams others
for the fruit of stream-entry, Moggallana for the supreme
goal. [1289] Sariputta, bhikkhus, is able to announce, teach, describe,
establish, reveal, expound, and exhibit the Four Noble Truths."

6. So the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Sublime One
rose from his seat and went into his dwelling. [249]
7. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the venerable
Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Friends, bhikkhus." -
"Friend," the bhikkhus replied to the venerable Sariputta. The
venerable Sariputta said this:
8. "At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma...and exhibiting of the Four
Noble Truths. Of what four?
9. "The announcing.. .and exhibiting of the noble truth of suf-
fering... of the noble truth of the origin of suffering...of the
noble truth of the cessation of suffering...of the noble truth of
the way leading to the cessation of suffering.
10. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of suffering? Birth is
suffering; ageing is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamen-
tation, pain, grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what
one wants is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by
clinging are suffering.
11. "And what, friends, is birth? [1290] The birth of beings into
the various orders of beings, their coming to birth, precipitation

[in a womb], generation, the manifestation of the aggregates,
obtaining the bases for contact - this is called birth.
12. "And what, friends, is ageing? The ageing of beings in the
various orders of beings, their old age, brokenness of teeth,
greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weakness of
faculties - this is called ageing.
13. "And what, friends, is death? The passing of beings out of
the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution,
disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of aggre-
gates, laying down of the body - this is called death.'
14. "And what, friends, is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing,
sorrowfulness, inner sorrow, inner sorriness, of one who has
encountered some misfortune or is affected by some painful
state - this is called sorrow.
15. "And what, friends, is lamentation? The wail and lament,
wailing and lamenting, [250] bewailing and lamentation, of one
who has encountered some misfortune or is affected by some
painful state - this is called lamentation.

16. "And what, friends, is pain? Bodily pain, bodily discom-
fort, painful, uncomfortable feeling born of bodily contact - this
is called pain.
17. "And what, friends, is grief? Mental pain, mental discom-
fort, painful, uncomfortable feeling born of mental contact - this
is called grief.
18. "And what, friends, is despair? The trouble and despair,
the tribulation and desperation, of one who has encountered
some misfortune or is affected by some painful state - this is
called despair.
19. "And what, friends, is 'not to obtain what one wants is suf-
fering'? To beings subject to birth there comes the wish: 'Oh,
that we were not subject to birth! That birth would not come to
us!' But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to obtain
what one wants is suffering. To beings subject to ageing...sub-
ject to sickness...subject to death...subject to sorrow, lamenta-
tion, pain, grief, and despair, there comes the wish: 'Oh, that we
were not subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair!
That sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair would not
come to us!' But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to
obtain what one wants is suffering.
20. "And what, friends, are the five aggregates affected by
clinging that, in short, are suffering? They are: the material form
aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by
clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the for-
mations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness
aggregate affected by clinging. These are the five aggregates
affected by clinging that, in short, are suffering. This is called the
noble truth of suffering.
21. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the origin of suf-
fering? It is craving, which brings renewal of being, is accompa-
nied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that; that is,
craving for sensual pleasures, craving for being, [251] and crav-
ing for non-being. This is called the noble truth of the origin of
suffering.
22. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the cessation of suf-
fering? It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the
giving up, relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that same
craving. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

23. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the way leading
to the cessation of suffering? It is just this Noble Eightfold
Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right concentration.
24. "And what, friends, is right view? Knowledge of suffering,
knowledge of the origin of suffering, knowledge of the cessation
of suffering, and knowledge of the way leading to the cessation
of suffering - this is called right view.
25. "And what, friends, is right intention? Intention of renun-
ciation, intention of non-ill will, and intention of non-cruelty -
this is called right intention.
26. "And what, friends, is right speech? Abstaining from false
speech, abstaining from malicious speech, abstaining from
harsh speech, and abstaining from idle chatter - this is called
right speech.
27. "And what, friends, is right action? Abstaining from
killing living beings, abstaining from taking what is not given,
and abstaining from misconduct in sensual pleasures - this is
called right action.
28. "And what, friends, is right livelihood? Here a noble disci-
ple, having abandoned wrong livelihood, earns his living by
right livelihood - this is called right livelihood.
29. "And what, friends, is right effort? Here a bhikkhu awak-
ens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states,
and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and
strives. He awakens zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil
unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts
his mind, and strives. He awakens zeal for the arising of
unarisen wholesome states, [252] and he makes effort, arouses
energy, exerts his mind, and strives. He awakens zeal for the
continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and
fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he
makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. This
is called right effort.
30. "And what, friends, is right mindfulness? Here a bhikkhu
abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware,
and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the
world. He abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent,
fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and

grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind as mind,
ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness
and grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind-objects
as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put
away covetousness and grief for the world. This is called right
mindfulness.
31. "And what, friends, is right concentration? Here, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome
states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which
is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture
and pleasure born of seclusion. With the stilling of applied and
sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second
jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of concentration. With the fading away as well of rapture, he
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' With the
abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disap-
pearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth
jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mind-
fulness due to equanimity. This is called right concentration.
"This is called the noble truth of the way leading to the cessa-
tion of suffering.
32. "At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by
any recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone in
the world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, estab-
lishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four
Noble Truths."

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's words.
