###### 142 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta

 The Exposition of Offerings

[253] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.
2. Then Mahapajapati GotamI took a new pair of cloths and
went to the Blessed One. [1291] After paying homage to him, she
sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir,
this new pair of cloths has been spun by me, woven by me,
especially for the Blessed One. Venerable sir, let the Blessed One
accept it from me out of compassion."
When this was said, the Blessed One told her: "Give it to the
Sangha, GotamI. When you give it to the Sangha, the offering
will be made both to me and to the Sangha." [1292 ]

A second time and a third time she said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir,.. .accept it from me out of compassion."
A second time and a third time the Blessed One told her:
"Give it to the Sangha, GotamI. When you give it to the Sangha,
the offering will be made both to me and to the Sangha."
3. Then the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept the new pair of cloths
from Mahapajapati GotamI. Mahapajapati GotamI has been very
helpful to the Blessed One, venerable sir. As his mother's sister,
she was his nurse, his foster mother, the one who gave him milk.
She suckled the Blessed One when his own mother died. The
Blessed One too has been very helpful to Mahapajapati GotamI,
venerable sir. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapati
GotamI has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the
Sangha. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapati GotamI
abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given,
from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, and
from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negli-
gence. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapati GotamI

possesses perfect confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and
the Sangha, and that she possesses [254] the virtues loved by
noble ones. [1293] It is owing to the Blessed One that MahapajapatI
GotamI is free from doubt about suffering, about the origin of
suffering, about the cessation of suffering, and about the way
leading to the cessation of suffering. The Blessed One has been
very helpful to MahapajapatI GotamI."
4. "That is so, Ananda, that is so! When one person, owing to
another, has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and
the Sangha, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay the
latter by paying homage to him, rising up for him, according
him reverential salutation and polite services, and by providing
robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites.
"When one person, owing to another, has come to abstain
from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from
misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, and from
wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence, I
say that it is not easy for the former to repay the latter by paying
homage to him.. .and medicinal requisites.
"When one person, owing to another, has come to possess
perfect confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,
and to possess the virtues loved by noble ones, I say that it is not
easy for the former to repay the latter by paying homage to
him.. .and medicinal requisites.
"When one person, owing to another, has become free from
doubt about suffering, about the origin of suffering, about the
cessation of suffering, and about the way leading to the cessa-
tion of suffering, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay
the latter by paying homage to him.. .and medicinal requisites.
5. "There are fourteen kinds of personal offerings, Ananda.[1294 ]
One gives a gift to the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened; this is the first kind of personal offering. One gives
a gift to a paccekabuddha; this is the second kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to an arahant disciple of the Tathagata;
this is the third kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to one
who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of
arahantship; this is the fourth kind of personal offering. One
gives a gift to a non-returner; this is the fifth kind of personal
offering. [255] One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the
way to the realisation of the fruit of non-return; this is the sixth

kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to a once-returner;
this is the seventh kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to
one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit
of once-return; this is the eighth kind of personal offering. One
gives a gift to a stream-enterer; this is the ninth kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way
to the realisation of the fruit of stream-entry;[1295] this is the tenth
kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to one outside [the
Dispensation] who is free from lust for sensual pleasures;[1296 ]
this is the eleventh kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to
| a virtuous ordinary person; this is the twelfth kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to an immoral ordinary person; this is
the thirteenth kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to an
animal; this is the fourteenth kind of personal offering.
6. "Herein, Ananda, by giving a gift to an animal, the offer-
; i ing may be expected to repay a hundredfold.[1297] By giving a
gift to an immoral ordinary person, the offering may be
expected to repay a thousandfold. By giving a gift to a virtu-
ous ordinary person, the offering may be expected to repay a
hundred-thousandfold. By giving a gift to one outside [the
Dispensation] who is free from lust for sensual pleasures, the

( offering may be expected to repay a hundred-thousand times
} a hundred-thousandfold.
"By giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the
**|i** realisation of the fruit of stream-entry, the offering may be ex-
| pected to repay incalculably, immeasurably. What, then, should

[J be said about giving a gift to a stream-enterer? What should be

      - said about giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to

f the realisation of the fruit of once-return.. .to a once-returner.. .to
! one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit
of non-return.. .to a non-returner.. .to one who has entered upon
the way to the realisation of the fruit of arahantship...to an ara-
hant... to a paccekabuddha? What should be said about giving a
gift to a Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened?[1298 ]
7. "There are seven kinds of offerings made to the Sangha,
Ananda. One gives a gift to a Sangha of both [bhikkhus and
bhikkhunls] headed by the Buddha; this is the first kind of offer-
ing made to the Sangha.[1299] One gives a gift to a Sangha of both

[bhikkhus and bhikkhunls] after the Tathagata has attained final
Nibbana; this is the second kind of offering made to the Sangha.

One gives a gift to a Sangha of bhikkhus; this is the third kind of
offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift to a Sangha of
bhikkhunls; this is the fourth kind of offering made to the
Sangha. One gives a gift, saying: 'Appoint so many bhikkhus
and bhikkhunls for me from the Sangha'; [256] this is the fifth
kind of offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift, saying:
'Appoint so many bhikkhus for me from the Sangha'; this is the
sixth kind of offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift, say-
ing: 'Appoint so many bhikkhunls for me from the Sangha'; this
is the seventh kind of offering made to the Sangha.
8. "In future times, Ananda, there will be members of the clan
who are 'yellow-necks/ immoral, of evil character.[1300] People
will give gifts to those immoral persons for the sake of the
Sangha. Even then, I say, an offering made to the Sangha is
incalculable, immeasurable.[1301] And I say that in no way does a
gift to a person individually ever have greater fruit than an
offering made to the Sangha.[1302 ]

9. "There are four kinds of purification of offering. What four?
There is the offering that is purified by the giver, not by the
receiver.[1303] There is the offering that is purified by the receiver,
not by the giver. There is the offering that is purified neither by
the giver nor by the receiver. There is the offering that is puri-
fied both by the giver and by the receiver.
10. "And what is the offering that is purified by the giver, not
by the receiver? Here the giver is virtuous, of good character,
and the receiver is immoral, of evil character. Thus the offering
is purified by the giver, not by the receiver.
11. "And what is the offering that is purified by the receiver,
not by the giver? Here the giver is immoral, of evil character,
and the receiver is virtuous, of good character. Thus the offering
is purified by the receiver, not by the giver.
12. "And what is the offering that is purified neither by the
giver nor by the receiver? Here the giver is immoral, of evil
character, and the receiver is immoral, of evil character. Thus
the offering is purified neither by the giver nor by the receiver.
13. "And what is the offering that is purified both by the giver
and by the receiver? Here the giver is virtuous, of good charac-
ter, and the receiver is virtuous, of good character. [257] Thus
the offering is purified both by the giver and by the receiver.
These are the four kinds of purification of offering."

14. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further:


14. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further:

"When a virtuous person to an immoral person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained,
Placing faith that the fruit of action is great,
The giver's virtue purifies the offering.

When an immoral person to a virtuous person gives
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained,
Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great,
The receiver's virtue purifies the offering.

When an immoral person to an immoral person gives
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained,
Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great,
Neither's virtue purifies the offering.

When a virtuous person to a virtuous person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained,
Placing faith that the fruit of action is great,
That gift, I say, will come to full fruition.

When a passionless person to a passionless person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained,
Placing faith that the fruit of action is great,
That gift, I say, is the best of worldly gifts." [1304 ]

