###### 144 Channovada Sutta

 Advice to Channa

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.
2. Now on that occasion the venerable Sariputta, the venerable
Maha Cunda, and the venerable Channa were living on the
mountain Vulture Peak.
3. On that occasion the venerable Channa was afflicted, suffer-
ing, and gravely ill. Then, when it was evening, the venerable
Sariputta rose from meditation, went to the venerable Maha
Cunda, and said to him: "Friend Cunda, let us go to the vener-
able Channa and ask about his illness." - "Yes, friend," the vener-
able Maha Cunda replied.
4. Then the venerable Sariputta and the venerable Maha
Cunda went to the venerable Channa and exchanged greetings
with him. When [264] this courteous and amiable talk was fin-
ished, they sat down at one side and the venerable Sariputta
said to the venerable Channa: "I hope you are getting well,
friend Channa, I hope you are comfortable. I hope your painful
feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsid-
ing, not their increase, is apparent."
5. "Friend Sariputta, I am not getting well, I am not comfort-
able. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding;...(as
_Sutta 143, ยง4)...their increase and not their subsiding is apparent._
I shall use the knife,[1307] friend Sariputta; I have no desire to live."
6. "Let the venerable Channa not use the knife. Let the vener-
able Channa live. We want the venerable Channa to live. If he
lacks suitable food, I will go in search of suitable food for him. If
he lacks suitable medicine, I will go in search of suitable medi-
cine for him. If he lacks a proper attendant, I will attend on him.
Let the venerable Channa not use the knife. Let the venerable
Channa live. We want the venerable Channa to live."

7. "Friend Sariputta, it is not that I have no suitable food and
medicine or no proper attendant. But rather, friend Sariputta,
the Teacher has long been worshipped by me with love, not
without love; for it is proper for the disciple to worship the
Teacher with love, not without love. Friend Sariputta, remember
this: the bhikkhu Channa will use the knife blamelessly."[1308 ]

8. "We would ask the venerable Channa certain questions, if
the venerable Channa finds it opportune to reply."
"Ask, friend Sariputta. When I have heard, I shall know."
9. "Friend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye-consciousness,
and things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness
thus: 'This is mine, this I am, [265] this is my self'? Do you
regard the ear...the nose...the tongue...the body...the mind,
mind-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?"
"Friend Sariputta, I regard the eye, eye-consciousness, and
things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness
thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' I
regard the ear...the nose...the tongue...the body...the mind,
mind-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness thus: 'This is not mine, this I am
not, this is not my self.'"
10. "Friend Channa, what have you seen, what have you
directly known in the eye, in eye-consciousness, and in things
cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness, that you
regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my
self'? What have you seen, what have you directly known in the
ear...in the nose...in the tongue...in the body...in the mind, in
mind-consciousness, and in things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness, that you regard them thus: 'This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self'?"
"Friend Sariputta, it is through seeing cessation, through
directly knowing cessation in the eye, in eye-consciousness, and
in things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness,
that I regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.' It is through seeing cessation, through directly
knowing cessation in the ear...in the nose...in the tongue...in
the body...in the mind, in mind-consciousness, and in things
cognizable [by the mind] through mind-consciousness, [266]

that I regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.'"
11. When this was said, the venerable Maha Cunda said to the
venerable Channa: [1309] "Therefore, friend Channa, this instruc-
tion of the Blessed One's is to be constantly given attention:
"There is wavering in one who is dependent, there is no waver-
ing in one who is independent; when there is no wavering, there
is tranquillity; when there is tranquillity, there is no bias; when
there is no bias, there is no coming and going; when there is no
coming and going, there is no passing away and reappearing;
when there is no passing away and reappearing, there is no here
nor beyond nor in between. This is the end of suffering.'"[1310 ]

12. Then when the venerable Sariputta and the venerable
Maha Cunda had advised the venerable Channa thus, they rose
from their seats and went away. Then, soon after they had gone,
the venerable Channa used the knife.[1311 ]

13. Then the venerable Sariputta went to thie Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, the venerable Channa has used
the knife. What is his destination, what is his future course?"
"Sariputta, didn't the bhikkhu Channa declare to you his
blamelessness?"[1312 ]
"Venerable sir, there is a Vajjian village called Pubbajira. There
the venerable Channa had families that were his friends, families
that were his intimates, families that were blameworthy."[1313 ]

"There are those families that were friends of the bhikkhu
Channa, Sariputta, families that were his intimates, families that
were blameworthy; but I do not say that to this extent he was
blameworthy. Sariputta, when one lays down this body and
clings to a new body, then I say one is blameworthy. There was
none of that in the bhikkhu Channa; the bhikkhu Channa used
the knife blamelessly."[1314 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
