###### 145 Punnovada Sutta

 Advice to Punna

_[267\ 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was_
living at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. Then,
when it was evening, the venerable Punna rose from meditation
and went to the Blessed One. [1315] After paying homage to the
Blessed One, he sat down at one side and said to him:
2. "Venerable sir, it would be good if the Blessed One would
give me brief advice. Having heard the Dhamma from the Blessed
One, I will abide alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute."
"Well then, Punna, listen and attend carefully to what I shall say."
"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Punna replied. The Blessed
One said this:
3. "Punna, there are forms cognizable by the eye that are
wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sen-
sual desire and provocative of lust. If a bhikkhu delights in
them, welcomes them, and remains holding to them, delight
arises in him. With the arising of delight, Punrta, there is the aris-
ing of suffering, I say. [1316] There are, Punna, sounds cognizable
by the ear...odours cognizable by the nose...flavours cognizable
by the tongue...tangibles cognizable by the body...mind-objects
cognizable by the mind that are wished for, desired, agreeable,
and likeable, connected with sensual desire [268] and provoca-
tive of lust. If a bhikkhu delights in them, welcomes them, and
remains holding to them, delight arises in him. With the arising
of delight, Purina, there is the arising of suffering, I say.
4. "Punna, there are forms cognizable by the eye...sounds
cognizable by the ear...odours cognizable by the nose.. .flavours
cognizable by the tongue...tangibles cognizable by the body...
mind-objects cognizable by the mind that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. If a bhikkhu does not delight in them,

welcome them, and remain holding to them, delight ceases in
him. With the cessation of delight, Punna, there is the cessation
of suffering, I say.
5. "Now that I have given you this brief advice, Punna, in
which country will you dwell?"
"Venerable sir, now that the Blessed One has given me this
brief advice, I am going to dwell in the Sunaparanta country."
"Punna, the people of Sunaparanta are fierce and rough. If
they abuse and threaten you, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta abuse and threat-
en me, then I shall think: "These people of Sunaparanta are kind,
truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow with the fist.'
Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall think thus,
Sublime One."
"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with the fist, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with the fist, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a clod.' Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One."
"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a clod, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a clod, then I shall think: 'These people of Sunapa-
ranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a stick.' Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One." [269]
"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a stick, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a stick, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a knife.' Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One."
"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a knife, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a knife, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind/ truly kind, in that they have not taken my life

with a sharp knife.' Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I
shall think thus, Sublime One.",
"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do take your life
with a sharp knife, what will you think then?"
"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do take my life
with a sharp knife, then I shall think thus: 'There have been dis-
ciples of the Blessed One who, being humiliated and disgusted
by the body and by life, sought to have their lives deprived by
the knife. But I have had my life deprived by the knife without
seeking for it.' Then I shall think thus, Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One."
6. "Good, good, Punna! Possessing such self-control and
peacefulness, you will be able to dwell in the Sunaparanta coun-
try. Now, Punna, it is time to do as you think fit."
7. Then, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One's
words, the venerable Punna rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the Blessed One, departed keeping him on his right.
He then set his resting place in order, took his bowl and outer
robe, and set out to wander towards the Sunaparanta country.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived in the Sunaparanta
country, and there he lived. Then, during that Rams, the venera-
ble Punna established five hundred men lay followers and five
hundred women lay followers in the practice, and he himself
realised the three true knowledges. On a later occasion, the ven-
erable Punna attained final Nibbana.[1317 ]

8. Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told
him: "Venerable sir, the clansman Punna, who [270] was given
brief advice by the Blessed One, has died. What is his destina-
tion? What is his future course?"
"Bhikkhus, the clansman Punna was wise. He practised in
accordance with the Dhamma and did not trouble me in the
interpretation of the Dhamma. The clansman Punna has
attained final Nibbana."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
