###### 147 Cularahulovada Sutta

 The Shorter Discourse of

 Advice to Rahula

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. [1323 ]
2. Then, while the Blessed One was alone in meditation, a
thought arose in his mind thus: "The states that ripen in deliver-
ance have ripened in Rahula.[1324] Suppose I were to lead him on
further to the destruction of the taints."
Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and tak-
ing his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms. When he
had walked for alms in Savatthl and had returned from his alms-
round, after his meal he addressed the venerable Rahula thus:
"Take your sitting cloth with you, Rahula; let us go to the
Blind Men's Grove [278] to pass the day."
"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Rahula replied, and tak-
ing his sitting cloth with him, he followed close behind the
Blessed One.
Now on that occasion many thousands of deities followed the
Blessed One, thinking: "Today the Blessed One will lead the
venerable Rahula further to the destruction of the taints." [1325 ]
Then the Blessed One went into the Blind Men's Grove and sat
down at the root of a certain tree on a seat made ready. And the
venerable Rahula paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down
at one side. The Blessed One then said to the venerable Rahula:
3. "Rahula, what do you think? Is the eye permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imper-
manent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir/' -
"Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" -
"No, venerable sir."
"Rahula, what do you think? Are forms...Is eye-consciousness

...[279]...Is eye-contact...Are any feeling, any perception, any
formations, any consciousness that arise with eye-contact as
condition permanent or impermanent?" [1326] - "Impermanent,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent suffering or happi-
ness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: "This is
mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."
4-8. "Rahula, what do you think? Is the ear permanent or
impermanent?...Is the nose permanent or impermanent?...Is the
tongue permanent or impermanent?.. .Is the body permanent or
impermanent?...Are mind-objects...Is mind-consciousness...Is
mind-contact...Are any feeling, any perception, any formations,
any consciousness that arise with mind-contact as condition per-
manent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject
to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."
9. "Seeing thus, Rahula, a well-taught noble disciple becomes
disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with forms, disen-
chanted with eye-consciousness, disenchanted with eye-contact,
and disenchanted with any feeling, any perception, any forma-
tions, any consciousness that arise with eye-contact as condition.
"He becomes disenchanted with the ear...He becomes disen-
chanted with the nose...He becomes disenchanted with the
tongue...He becomes disenchanted with the body...He becomes
disenchanted with the mind, disenchanted with mind-objects,
disenchanted with mind-consciousness, disenchanted with mind-
contact, [280] and disenchanted with any feeling, any perception,
any formations, any consciousness that arise with mind-contact
as condition.
10. "Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through
dispassion [his mind] is liberated. When it is liberated there
comes the knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words. Now

1128 CularShulovada Sutta: Sutta 147 iii 280

while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging
the venerable Rahula's mind was liberated from the taints.
And in those many thousands of deities there arose the spot-
less immaculate vision of the Dhamma: "All that is subject to
arising is subject to cessation." [1327 ]
