###### 151 Pindapataparisuddhi Sutta

 The Purification of Almsfood

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanc-
tuary. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sariputta rose
from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying
homage to him, he sat down at one side. The Blessed One then
said to him: [294]
2. "Sariputta, your faculties are clear. The colour of your skin
is pure and bright. What abiding do you often abide in now,
Sariputta?"
"Now, venerable sir, I often abide in voidness."[1347 ]
"Good, good, Sariputta! Now, indeed, you often abide in the
abiding of a great man. For this is the abiding of a great man,
namely, voidness.[1348 ]

3. "So, Sariputta, if a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I now often
abide in voidness/ he should consider thus: 'On the path by
which 1 went to the village for alms, or in the place where I
wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, was there any desire, lust, hate, delusion, or
aversion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the
eye?' [1349] If, by so reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms, or in the place where I
wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, there was desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aver-
sion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the eye/ then
he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome
states. But if, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms, and in the place where I
wandered for alms, and on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, there was no desire, lust, hate, delusion, or
aversion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the eye,'

1144 PindapatapSrisuddhi Sutta: Sutta 151 iii 295

then he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in
wholesome states.
4-8. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'On
the path by which I went to the village for alms, or in the place
where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned
from the almsround, was there any desire, lust, hate, delusion,
or aversion in my mind regarding sounds cognizable by the
ear?...regarding odours cognizable by the nose?...regarding
flavours cognizable by the tongue?...regarding tangibles cogniz-
able by the body?...regarding mind-objects cognizable by the
mind?' [295] If, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms...there was desire, lust,
hate, delusion, or aversion in my mind regarding mind-objects
cognizable by the mind,' then he should make an effort to aban-
don those evil unwholesome states. But if, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'On the path by which I went to the village for
alms...there was no desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aversion in
my mind regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind/ then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states.
9. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are the
five cords of sensual pleasure abandoned in me?' [1 3 5 0] If, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five cords of sensual pleasure
are not abandoned in me/ then he should make an effort to
abandon those five cords of sensual pleasure. But if, by review-
ing, he knows thus: 'The five cords of sensual pleasure are aban-
doned in me,' then he can abide happy and glad, training day
and night in wholesome states.
10. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the five hindrances abandoned in me?' If, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'The five hindrances are not abandoned in me/
then he should make an effort to abandon those five hindrances.
But if, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five hindrances are
abandoned in me/ then he can abide happy and glad, training
day and night in wholesome states.
11. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the five aggregates affected by clinging fully understood by
me?' If, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five aggregates
affected by clinging are not fully understood by me/ then he

should make an effort to fully understand those five aggregates
affected by clinging. But if, by reviewing, [296] he knows thus:
'The five aggregates affected by clinging are fully understood by
me,' then he can abide happy and glad, training day and night
in wholesome states.
12. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the four foundations of mindfulness developed in me?' If, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The four foundations of mindfulness
are not developed in me,' then he should make an effort to
develop those four foundations of mindfulness. But if, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The four foundations of mindfulness
are developed in me,' then he can abide happy and glad, train-
ing day and night in wholesome states.
13-19. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the four right kinds of striving developed in me?...Are the four
bases for spiritual power developed in me?...Are the five facul-
ties developed in me?...Are the five powers developed in
me?...Are the seven enlightenment factors developed in
me?...Is the Noble Eightfold Path developed in me? [297]...Are
serenity and insight developed in me?' If, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'Serenity and insight are not developed in me,' then
he should make an effort to develop them. But if, by reviewing,
he knows thus: 'Serenity and insight are developed in me,' then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states.
20. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
true knowledge and deliverance realised by me?' If, by review-
ing, he knows thus: 'True knowledge and deliverance are not
realised by me,' then he should make an effort to realise true
knowledge and deliverance. But if, by reviewing, he knows
thus: 'True knowledge and deliverance are realised by me,' then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states.[1351 ]

21. "Sariputta, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past
have purified their almsfood have all done so by repeatedly
reviewing thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the future
will purify their almsfood will all do so by repeatedly reviewing
thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present are purify-
ing their almsfood are all doing so by repeatedly reviewing

thus. Therefore, Sariputta, you should train thus: 'We will purify
our almsfood by repeatedly reviewing thus/"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
