###### 56 Upali Sutta

 To Upali

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Nalanda in Pavarika's Mango Grove.
2. Now on that occasion the Nigantha Nataputta was staying
at Nalanda with a large assembly of Niganthas. Then, when the
Nigantha [named] Dlgha TapassI[578] had wandered for alms in
Nalanda and had returned from his almsround, after his meal
he went to Pavarika's Mango Grove to see the Blessed One.

[372] He exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one
side. As he stood there, the Blessed One said to him: "There are
seats, TapassI, sit down if you like."
3. When this was said, Dlgha TapassI took a low seat and sat
down at one side. Then the Blessed One asked him: "TapassI,
how many kinds of action does the Nigantha Nataputta
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"
"Friend Gotama, the Nigantha Nataputta is not accustomed to
use the description 'action, action'; the Nigantha Nataputta is
accustomed to use the description 'rod, rod.'" [579 ]
"Then, TapassI, how many kinds of rod does the Nigantha
Nataputta describe for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action?"
"Friend Gotama, the Nigantha Nataputta describes three
kinds of rod for the performance of evil action, for the perpetra-
tion of evil action; that is, the bodily rod, the verbal rod, and the
mental rod." [580 ]
"How then, TapassI, is the bodily rod one, the verbal rod
another, and the mental rod still another?"
"The bodily rod is one, friend Gotama, the verbal rod is
another, and the mental rod is still another."

"Of these three kinds of rod, TapassI, thus analysed and dis-
tinguished, which kind of rod does the Nigantha Nataputta
describe as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil
action, for the perpetration of evil action: the bodily rod or the
verbal rod or the mental rod?"
"Of these three kinds of rod, friend Gotama, thus analysed
and distinguished, the Nigantha Nataputta describes the bodily
rod as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action,
for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal
rod and the mental rod."
"Do you say the bodily rod, TapassI?"
"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."
"Do you say the bodily rod, TapassI?"
"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."
"Do you say the bodily rod, TapassI?"
"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."
Thus the Blessed One made the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI main-
tain his statement up to the third time. [373]
4. Then the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI asked the Blessed One:
"And you, friend Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"
"TapassI, the Tathagata is not accustomed to use the descrip-
tion 'rod, rod'; the Tathagata is accustomed to use the descrip-
tion'action, action.'"
"But, friend Gotama, how many kinds of action do you
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"
"TapassI, I describe three kinds of action for the performance
of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action: that is, bodily
action, verbal action, and mental action."
"How then, friend Gotama, is bodily action one, verbal action
another, and mental action still another?"
"Bodily action is one, TapassI, verbal action is another, and
mental action is still another."
"Of these three kinds of action, friend Gotama, thus analysed
and distinguished, which kind of action do you describe as the
most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action: bodily action or verbal action or
mental action?"

"Of these three kinds of action, Tapassi, thus analysed and
distinguished, I describe mental action as the most reprehensi-
ble for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil
action, and not so much bodily action and verbal action."[581 ]
"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"
"I say mental action, Tapassi."
"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"
"I say mental action, Tapassi."
"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"
"I say mental action, Tapassi."
Thus the Nigantha Digha Tapassi made the Blessed One main-
tain his statement up to the third time, after which he rose from
his seat and went to the Nigantha Nataputta.
5. Now on that occasion the Nigantha Nataputta was seated
together with a very large assembly of laymen from Balaka,
most prominent among them being Upali. The Nigantha
Nataputta saw the Nigantha Digha Tapassi coming in the dis-
tance and asked him: "Now where are you coming from in the
middle of the day, Tapassi?"
"I am coming from the presence of the recluse Gotama, ven-
erable sir."
"Did you have some conversation with the recluse Gotama,
Tapassi?" [374]
"I had some conversation with the recluse Gotama, ven-
erable sir."
"What was your conversation with him like, Tapassi?"
Then the Nigantha Digha Tapassi related to the Nigantha
Nataputta his entire conversation with the Blessed One.
6. When this was said, the Nigantha Nataputta told him:
"Good, good, Tapassi! The Nigantha Digha Tapassi has
answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who
understands his teacher's dispensation rightly. What does the
trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily
rod? On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible
for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil
action, and not so much the verbal rod and the mental rod."
7. When this was said, the householder Upali said to the
Nigantha Nataputta: "Good, good, venerable sir, [on the part of]
Digha Tapassi! The venerable Tapassi has answered the recluse
Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands his

teacher's dispensation rightly. What does the trivial mental rod
count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod? On the con-
trary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the perfor-
mance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not
so much the verbal rod and the mental rod. Now, venerable sir,
I shall go and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine on the basis
of this statement. If the recluse Gotama maintains before me
what the venerable Dlgha Tapassi made him maintain, then just
as a strong man [582] might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and
drag him to and drag him fro and drag him round about, so in
debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and
drag him round about. Just as a strong brewer's workman might
throw a big brewer's sieve into a deep water tank, and taking it
by the corners, might drag it to and drag it fro and drag it round
about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag
him fro and drag him round about. Just as a strong brewer's
mixer might take a strainer by the corners and shake it down
and shake it up and thump it about, so in debate I will shake the
recluse Gotama down [375] and shake him up and thump him
about. And just as a sixty-year-old elephant might plunge into a
deep pond and enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing, so I
shall enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing with the recluse
Gotama. Venerable sir, I shall go and refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine on the basis of this statement."
"Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine on
the basis of this statement. For either I should refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine or else the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi or you
yourself."
8. When this was said, the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi said to the
Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I do not think that the house-
holder Upali should [try to] refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine.
For the recluse Gotama is a magician and knows a converting
magic by which he converts disciples of other sectarians."
"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali.
Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine. For
either I should refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine or else the
Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi or you yourself."

For the second time...For the third time, the Nigantha Digha
Tapassi said to the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I do not
think that the householder Upali should [try to] refute the
recluse Gotama's doctrine. For the recluse Gotama is a magician
and knows a converting magic by which he converts disciples of
other sectarians."
"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali.
Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine. For
either I should refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine or else the
Nigantha Digha Tapassi or you yourself."
9. "Yes, venerable sir," the householder Upali replied, and he
rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Nigantha
Nataputta, keeping him on his right, he left to go to the Blessed
One in Pavarika's Mango Grove. [376] There, after paying homage
to the Blessed One, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, did the Nigantha Digha Tapassi come here?"
"The Nigantha Digha Tapassi came here, householder."
"Venerable sir, did you have some conversation with him?"
"I had some conversation with him, householder."
"What was your conversation with him like, venerable sir?"
Then the Blessed One related to the householder Upali his
entire conversation with the Nigantha Digha Tapassi.
10. When this was said, the householder Upali said to the
Blessed One: "Good, good, venerable sir, on the part of Tapassi!
The Nigantha Digha Tapassi has answered the Blessed One like
a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher's dispensation
rightly. What does the trivial mental rod count for in compari-
son with the gross bodily rod? On the contrary, the bodily rod is
the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal rod and
the mental rod."
"Householder, if you will debate on the basis of truth, we
might have some conversation about this."
"I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us
have some conversation about this."
11. "What do you think, householder? Here some Nigantha
might be afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill [with an illness

needing treatment by cold water, which his vows prohibit] and
he might refuse cold water [though mentally longing for it] and
use only [the permissible] hot water [thus keeping his vows
bodily and verbally]. Because he does not get cold water he
might die. Now, householder, where would the Nigantha
Nataputta describe his rebirth [as taking place]?"
"Venerable sir, there are gods called 'mind-bound'; he would
be reborn there. Why is that? Because when he died he was still
bound [by attachment] in the mind." [583 ]
"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"
"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of
evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod." [584 ]

12. "What do you think, [377] householder? Here some
Nigantha might be restrained with four checks - curbed by all
curbs, clamped by all curbs, cleansed by all curbs, and claimed
by all curbs[585] - and yet when going forward and returning he
brings about the destruction of many small living beings. What
result does the Nigantha Nataputta describe for him?"
"Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta does not describe
what is not willed as greatly reprehensible."
"But if one wills it, householder?"
"Then it is greatly reprehensible, venerable sir."
"But under which [of the three rods] does the Nigantha
Nataputta describe willing, householder?"
"Under the mental rod, venerable sir." [586 ]
"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"
"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of

evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod."
13. "What do you think, householder? Is this town of
Nalanda successful and prosperous, is it populous and crowded
with people?"
"Yes, venerable sir, it is."
"What do you think, householder? Suppose a man came here
brandishing a sword and spoke thus: 'In one moment, in one
instant, I will make all the living beings in this town of Nalanda
into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh.' What do you
think, householder, would that man be able to do that?"
"Venerable sir, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or even fifty men
would not be able to make all the living beings in this town of
Nalanda into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh in one
moment or instant, so what does a single trivial man count for?"
"What do you think, householder? Suppose some recluse or
brahmin came here possessed of supernormal power and
attained to mastery of mind, and he spoke thus: 'I will reduce
this town of Nalanda to ashes with one mental act of hate.' What
do you think, householder, would such a recluse or brahmin be
able to do that?" [378]
"Venerable sir, such a recluse or brahmin possessed of super-
normal power and attained to mastery of mind would be able to
reduce ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or even fifty Nalandas to ashes
with one mental act of hate, so what does a single trivial
Nalanda count for?"
"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply! What
you said before does not agree with what you said afterwards, nor
does what you said afterwards agree with what you said before.
Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the basis of truth,
venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.'"
"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of
evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod."
14. "What do you think, householder? Have you heard how
the Dandaka, Kalinga, Mejjha, and Matanga forests became
forests?"[587] - "Yes, venerable sir." - "As you heard it, how did
they become forests?" - "Venerable sir, I heard that they became
forests by means of a mental act of hate on the part of the seers."

"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"
15. "Venerable sir, I was satisfied and pleased by the Blessed
One's very first simile. Nevertheless, I thought I would oppose
the Blessed One thus since I desired to hear the Blessed One's
varied solutions to the problem. Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir! The Blessed One has made the
Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. Venerable sir, I go
to the Blessed One for refuge [379] and to the Dhamma and to
the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the Blessed One remember me as a
lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."
16. "Investigate thoroughly, householder. It is good for such
well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly."
"Venerable sir, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the
Blessed One for telling me that. For the other sectarians, on
acquiring me as their disciple, would carry a banner all over
Nalanda announcing: 'The householder Upali has come to dis-
cipleship under us.' But, on the contrary, the Blessed One tells
me: 'Investigate thoroughly, householder. It is good for such
well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly.' So for
the second time, venerable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge
and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the
Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."
17. "Householder, your family has long supported the
Niganthas and you should consider that alms should be given to
them when they come."
"Venerable sir, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the
Blessed One for telling me that. Venerable sir, I have heard that
the recluse Gotama says thus: 'Gifts should be given only to me;
gifts should not be given to others. Gifts should be given only to
my disciples; gifts should not be given to others' disciples. Only
what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others.

Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is
given to others' disciples.' But, on the contrary, the Blessed One
encourages me to give gifts to the Niganthas. Anyway we shall
know the time for that, venerable sir. So for the third time, ven-
erable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma
and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the Blessed One remember
me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."
18. Then the Blessed One gave the householder Upali progres-
sive instruction, that is, talk on giving, talk on virtue, talk on the
heavens; he explained the danger, degradation, and defilement
in sensual pleasures and the blessing of renunciation. When he
knew that the householder Upali's mind [380] was ready, recep-
tive, free from hindrances, elated, and confident, he expounded
to him the teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin,
its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean cloth with all marks
removed would take dye evenly, so too, while the householder
Upali sat there, the spotless immaculate vision of the Dhamma
arose in him: "All that is subject to arising is subject to cessa-
tion." [588] Then the householder Upali saw the Dhamma, attained
the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma;
he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained
intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher's
Dispensation.[589] Then he said to the Blessed One: "Now, vener-
able sir, we must go. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, householder, to do as you think fit."
19. Then the householder Upali, having delighted and rejoiced
in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he left to
return to his own house. There he addressed the doorkeeper
thus: "Good doorkeeper, from today on I close my door to the
Niganthas and the Niganthls, and I open my door to the Blessed
One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay followers, and women lay
followers. If any Nigantha comes, then tell him thus: 'Wait, ven-
erable sir, do not enter. From today on the householder Upali
has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. He has
closed his door to the Niganthas and Niganthls, and he has
opened it to the Blessed One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay
followers, and women lay followers. Venerable sir, if you need
alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here.'" - "Yes, vener-
able sir," the doorkeeper replied.

20. The Nigantha Dlgha TapassI heard: "The householder
Upali has gone over to discipleship tinder the recluse Gotama."
Then he went to the Nigantha Nataputta and told him:
"Venerable sir, I have heard thus: "The householder Upali has
gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.'"
"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse
Gotama might come over to discipleship under the householder
Upali." [381]
A second time...And a third time the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI
told the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I have heard thus:
'The householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama.'"
"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen..."
"Venerable sir, shall I go and find out whether or not the
householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama?"
"Go, TapassI, and find out whether or not he has gone over to
discipleship under the recluse Gotama."
21. Then the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI went to the householder
Upali's house. The doorkeeper saw him coming in the distance
and told him: "Wait, venerable sir, do not enter. From today on
the householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama. He has closed his door to the Niganthas and
Niganthls, and he has ppened it to the Blessed One's bhikkhus,
bhikkhunls, men lay followers, and women lay followers.
Venerable sir, if you need alms, wait here; they will bring it to
you here."
"I do not need alms, friend," he said, and he turned back and
went to the Nigantha Nataputta and told him: "Venerable sir, it
is only too true that the householder Upali has gone over to dis-
cipleship under the recluse Gotama. Venerable sir, I did not get
your consent when I told you: 'Venerable sir, I do not think that
the householder Upali should [try to] refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine. For the recluse Gotama is a magician and
knows a converting magic by which he converts disciples of
other sectarians.' And now, venerable sir, your householder
Upali has been converted by the recluse Gotama with his con-
verting magic!"

"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali."
A second time.. .And a third time the Nigantha Digha Tapassi
told the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, it is only too true
that the householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under
the recluse Gotama [382],..with his converting magic!"
"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen...it can happen
that the recluse Gotama might come over to discipleship under
the householder Upali. Now I shall go myself and find out
whether or not he has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama."
22. Then the Nigantha Nataputta went with a large assembly
of Niganthas to the householder Upali's house. The doorkeeper
saw him coming in the distance and told him: "Wait, venerable
sir, do not enter. From today on the householder Upali has gone
over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. He has closed his
door to the Niganthas and Niganthls, and he has opened his
door to the Blessed One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay fol-
lowers, and women lay followers. Venerable sir, if you need
alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here."
"Good doorkeeper, go to the householder Upali and tell him:
'Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta is standing at the outer
gate with a large assembly of Niganthas; he wishes to see you.'"
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the householder
Upali and told him: "Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta is
standing at the outer gate with a large assembly of Niganthas;
he wishes to see you."
"In that case, good doorkeeper, make seats ready in the hall of
the central door."
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and after he had made seats
ready in the hall of the central door, he returned to the house-
holder Upali and told him: "Venerable sir, the seats are made
ready in the hall of the central door. Now it is time to do as you
think fit."
23. Then the householder Upali [383] went to the hall of the
central door and sat down on the highest, best, chief, most
excellent seat there. Then he told the doorkeeper: "Now, good
doorkeeper, go to the Nigantha Nataputta and tell him:

'Venerable sir, the householder Upali says: "Enter, venerable
sir, if you wish.'""
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the Nigantha
Nataputta and told him: "Venerable sir, the householder Upali
says: 'Enter, venerable sir, if you wish.'"
Then the Nigantha Nataputta went with the large assembly of
Niganthas to the hall of the central door.
24. Previously, when the householder Upali saw the Nigantha
Nataputta coming in the distance, he used to go out to meet
him, dust off the highest, best, chief, most excellent seat there
with an upper robe, and having arranged it all around, have
him seated on it. But now, while seated himself on the highest,
best, chief, most excellent seat, he told Nigantha Nataputta:
"Venerable sir, there are seats; sit down if you wish."
25. When this was said, the Nigantha Nataputta said:
"Householder, you are mad, you are an imbecile. You went say-
ing: 'Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine,'
and you have come back all caught up in a vast net of doctrine.
Just as if a man went to castrate someone and came back castrat-
ed on both sides, just as if a man went to put out someone's eyes
and came back with both his eyes put out; so you too, house-
holder, went saying: 'Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine,' and you have come back all caught up in a
vast net of doctrine. Householder, you have been converted by
the recluse Gotama with his converting magic!"
26. "Auspicious is that converting magic, venerable sir, good is
that converting magic![590] Venerable sir, if my beloved kinsmen
and relatives were to be converted by this conversion, it would
lead to the welfare and happiness of my beloved kinsmen and
relatives for a long time. If all nobles were to be converted by
this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of
the nobles for a long time. [384] If all brahmins... all merchants.. •
all workers were to be converted by this conversion, it would
lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
If the world with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this gener-
ation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people,
were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the
welfare and happiness of the world for a long time. As to this,
venerable sir, I shall give you a simile; for some wise men here
understand the meaning of a statement by a simile.

27. "Venerable sir, there was once a brahmin who was old,
aged, and burdened with years, and he had as a wife a young
brahmin girl who was pregnant and near her confinement. Then
she told him: 'Go, brahmin, buy a young monkey in the market
and bring it back to me as a playmate for my child.' He replied:
'Wait, madam, till you have borne the child. If you bear a boy,
then I will go to the market and buy a young male monkey and
bring it back to you as a playmate for your little boy; but if you
bear a girl, then I will go to the market and buy a young female
monkey and bring it back to you as a playmate for your little
girl.' For the second time she made the same request and
received the same answer. For the third time she made the same
request. Then, since his mind was bound to her with love, he
went to the market, bought a young male monkey, brought it
back, and told her: 'I have bought this young male monkey in
the market [385] and brought it back to you as a playmate for
your child.' Then she told him: 'Go, brahmin, take this young
male monkey to Rattapani the dyer's son and tell him: "Good
Rattapani, I want this young male monkey dyed the colour called
yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and smoothened out
on both sides.'" Then, since his mind was bound to her with
love, he took the young male monkey to Rattapani the dyer's
son and told him: 'Good Rattapani, I want this young male
monkey dyed the colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and
re-pounded, and smoothened out on both sides.' Rattapani the
dyer's son told him: 'Venerable sir, this young male monkey
will take a dyeing but not a pounding or a smoothening out.' So
too, venerable sir, the doctrine of the foolish Niganthas will give
delight to fools but not to the wise, and it will not withstand
testing or being smoothened out.

"Then, venerable sir, on another occasion that brahmin took a
pair of new garments to Rattapani the dyer's son and told him:
'Good Rattapani, I want this pair of new garments dyed the
colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and
smoothened out on both sides.' Rattapani the dyer's son told
him: 'Venerable sir, this pair of new garments will take a dyeing
and a pounding and a smoothening out.' So too, venerable sir,
the doctrine of that Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened, will give delight to the wise but not to fools, and it
will withstand testing and being smoothened out."

28. "Householder, the assembly and the king know you thus:
'The householder Upali is a disciple of the Nigantha Nataputta.'
Whose disciple should we consider you to be?"
When this was said, the householder Upali rose from his seat,
and arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, [386] he extended
his hands in reverential salutation in the direction of the Blessed
One and told the Nigantha Nataputta:
29. "In that case, venerable sir, hear whose disciple I am:

He is the Wise One who has cast off delusion,
abandoned the heart's wilderness,[591] victor in battle;
He knows no anguish, is perfectly even-minded,
mature in virtue, of excellent wisdom;
Beyond all temptations,[592] he is without stain:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

Free from perplexity, he abides contented,
spurning worldly gains, a vessel of gladness;
A human being who has done the recluse's duty,
a man who bears his final body;
He is utterly peerless and utterly spotless:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He is free from doubt and skilful,
the discipliner and excellent leader.
None can surpass his resplendent qualities;
without hesitation, he is the illuminator;
Having severed conceit, he is the hero:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The leader of the herd, he cannot be measured,
his depths are unfathomed, he attained to the silence;[593 ]
Provider of safety, possessor of knowledge,
he stands in the Dhamma, inwardly restrained;
Having overcome all bondage, he is liberated:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The immaculate tusker, living in remoteness,
with fetters all shattered, fully freed;
Skilled in discussion, imbued with wisdom,

his banner lowered,[594] he no longer lusts;
Having tamed himself, he no more proliferates:[595 ]
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The best of seers,[596] with no deceptive schemes,
gained the triple knowledge, attained to holiness;
His heart cleansed, a master of discourse,
he lives ever tranquil, the finder of knowledge;
The first of all givers, he is ever capable:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He is the Noble One, developed in mind,
who has gained the goal and expounds the truth;
Endowed with mindfulness and penetrative insight,
he leans neither forwards nor back; [597 ]
Free from perturbation, attained to mastery:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He has fared rightly and abides in meditation,
inwardly undefiled, in purity perfect;
He is independent and altogether fearless,[598 ]
living secluded, attained to the summit;
Having crossed over himself, he leads us across:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

Of supreme serenity, with extensive wisdom,
a man of great wisdom, devoid of all greed;
He is the Tathagata, he is the Sublime One,
the person unrivalled, the one without equal;
He is intrepid, proficient in all:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He has severed craving and become the Enlightened One,
cleared of all clouds, completely untainted;
Most worthy of gifts, most mighty of spirits,
most perfect of persons, beyond estimation;
The greatest in grandeur, attained the peak of glory:
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple."

i 3 7

30. "When did you concoct that hymn of praise to the recluse
Gotama, householder?"
"Venerable sir, suppose there were a great heap of many
kinds of flowers, [387] and then a clever garland-maker or
garland-maker's apprentice were to knot them into a multi-
coloured garland; so too, venerable sir, the Blessed One has
many praiseworthy qualities, many hundred praiseworthy qual-
ities. Who, venerable sir, would not praise the praiseworthy?"
31. Then, since the Nigantha Nataputta was unable to bear
this honour done to the Blessed One, hot blood then and there
gushed from his mouth.[599 ]
