###### 62 Maharahulovada Sutta

 The Greater Discourse of

 Advice to Rahula

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD.[640] On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI for alms. The
venerable Rahula also [421] dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, followed close behind the Blessed One.
3. Then the Blessed One looked back and addressed the
venerable Rahula thus: [641] "Rahula, any kind of material form
whatever, whether past, future, or present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all material form
should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'"
"Only material form, Blessed One? Only material form,
Sublime One?"
"Material form, Rahula, and feeling, perception, formations,
and consciousness."
4. Then the venerable Rahula considered thus: "Who would
go into the town for alms today when personally admonished
by the Blessed One?" Thus he turned back and sat down at the
root of a tree, folding his. legs crosswise, setting his body erect,
and establishing mindfulness in front of him.
5. The venerable Sariputta saw him sitting there and
addressed him thus: "Rahula, develop mindfulness of breathing.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it
is of great fruit and great benefit."[642 ]

6. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Rahula rose from
meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying homage
to him, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One:
7. "Venerable sir, how is mindfulness of breathing developed
and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?"

(THE FOUR GREAT ELEMENTS)

8. "Rahula,[643] whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid,
solidified, and clung-to, that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails,
teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines,
contents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is
called the internal earth element. Now both the internal earth
element and the external earth element are simply earth ele-
ment. And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wis-
dom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'

[422] When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom,
one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes
the mind dispassionate towards the earth element.
9. "What, Rahula, is the water element? The water element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal water ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water,
watery, and clung-to, that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat,
tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever
else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-
to: this is called the internal water element. Now both the inter-
nal water element and the external water element are simply
water element. And that should be seen as it actually is with
proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not
my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wis-
dom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and
makes the mind dispassionate towards the water element.
10. "What, Rahula, is the fire element? The fire element may
be either internal or external. What is the internal fire element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and
clung-to, that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is con-
sumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and
tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the
internal fire element. Now both the internal fire element and the
external fire element are simply fire element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as it

actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with
the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the
fire element.
11. "What, Rahula, is the air element? The air element may be
either internal or external. What is the internal air element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and
clung-to, that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in
the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the
limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the
internal air element. Now both the internal air element and the
external air element are simply air element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' [423] When one sees it
thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disen-
chanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate
towards the air element.
12. "What, Rahula, is the space element?[644] The space element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal space ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spa-
tial, and clung-to, that is, the holes of the ears, the nostrils, the
door of the mouth, and that [aperture] whereby what is eaten,
drunk, consumed, and tasted gets swallowed, and where it col-
lects, and whereby it is excreted from below, or whatever else
internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to:
this is called the internal space element. Now both the internal
space element and the external space element are simply space
element. And that should be seen as it actually is with proper
wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one
becomes disenchanted with the space element and makes the
mind dispassionate towards the space element.
13. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like the earth; for when
you develop meditation that is like the earth, arisen agreeable
and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and
remain.[645] Just as people throw clean things and dirty things,
excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood on the earth, and the
earth is not horrified, humiliated, and disgusted because of that,
so too, Rahula, develop meditation that is like the earth; for when

you develop meditation that is like the earth, arisen agreeable
and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
14. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like water; for when
you develop meditation that is like water, arisen agreeable and
disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as people wash clean things and dirty things, excrement,
urine, spittle, pus, and blood in water, and the water is not hor-
rified, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, [424]
Rahula, develop meditation that is like water; for when you
develop meditation that is like water, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
15. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like fire; for when you
develop meditation that is like fire, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain. Just
as people bum clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine,
spittle, pus, and blood in fire, and the fire is not horrified,
humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rahula, devel-
op meditation that is like fire; for when you develop meditation
that is like fire, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will
not invade your mind and remain.
16. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like air; for when you
develop meditation that is like air, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain. Just
as the air blows on clean things and dirty things, on excrement,
urine, spittle, pus, and blood, and the air is not horrified, humili-
ated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rahula, develop
meditation that is like air; for when you develop meditation that
is like air, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not
invade your mind and remain.
17. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like space; for when
you develop meditation that is like space, arisen agreeable and
disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as space is not established anywhere, so too, Rahula, develop
meditation that is like space; for when you develop meditation
that is like space, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will
not invade your mind and remain.
18. "Rahula, develop meditation on loving-kindness; for when
you develop meditation on loving-kindness, any ill will will be
abandoned.
19. "Rahula, develop meditation on compassion; for when

you develop meditation on compassion, any cruelty will be
abandoned.
20. "Rahula, develop meditation on appreciative joy; for when
you develop meditation on appreciative joy, any discontent will
be abandoned.
21. "Rahula, develop meditation on equanimity; for when
you develop meditation on equanimity, any aversion will be
abandoned.
22. "Rahula, develop meditation on foulness; for when you
develop meditation on foulness, any lust will be abandoned.
23. "Rahula, develop meditation on the perception of imper-
manence; [425] for when you develop meditation on the percep-
tion of impermanence, the conceit 'I am' will be abandoned.
24. "Rahula, develop meditation on mindfulness of breathing.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it
is of great fruit and great benefit. And how is mindfulness of
breathing developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit
and great benefit?
25. "Here, Rahula, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of
a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs cross-
wise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of
him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.[646 ]

26. "Breathing in long, he understands: 'I breathe in long'; or
breathing out long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.'
Breathing in short, he understands: 'I breathe in short'; or
breathing out short, he understands: 'I breathe out short.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body [of
breath]'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the
whole body [of breath].' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tran-
quillising the bodily formation'; he trams thus: 'I shall breathe
out tranquillising the bodily formation.'
27. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing rapture';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.' He trams thus:
'I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation.' He
trams thus: 'I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental forma-
tion'; he trams thus: 'I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental
formation.'

28. "He trains thus: T shall breathe in experiencing the mind';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mind-' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in gladdening the mind'; life trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out gladdening the mind.' He trains thus: 'I
shall breathe in concentrating the mind'; he trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out concentrating the mind.' He trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in liberating the mind'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out liberating the mind.'
29. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating imperma-
nence'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating imper-
manence.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating fading
away'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating fading
away.' He trains thus; 'I shall breathe in contemplating cessation';
he trains thus: T shall breathe out contemplating cessation.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment'; he
trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment.'
30. "Rahula, that is how mindfulness of breathing is devel-
oped and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in
this way, [426] even the final in-breaths and out-breaths are
known as they cease, not unknown."[647 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
