###### 86 Angulimala Sutta

 On Angulimala

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Now on that occasion there was a bandit in the realm of
King Pasenadi of Kosala named Angulimala, who was murder-
ous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to
living beings. Villages, towns, [98] and districts were laid waste
by him. He was constantly murdering people and he wore their
fingers as a garland.[820 ]

3. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Savatthl and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he set his resting place in
order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out on the road
leading towards Angulimala. Cowherds, shepherds, and
ploughmen passing by staw the Blessed One walking along the
road leading towards Angulimala and told him: "Do not take
this road, recluse. On this road is the bandit Angulimala, who is
murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merci-
less to living beings. Villages, towns, and districts have been
laid waste by him. He is constantly murdering people and he
wears their fingers as a garland. Men have come along this road
in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, and even forty, but still they
have fallen into Angulimala's hands." When this was said the
Blessed One went on in silence.
For the second time...For the third time the cowherds, shep-
herds, and ploughmen told this to the Blessed One, but still the
Blessed One went on in silence.
4. The bandit Angulimala saw the Blessed One coming in the
distance. When he saw him, he thought: "It is wonderful, it is
marvellous! Men have come along this road in groups of ten,

twenty, [99] thirty, and even forty, but still they have fallen
into my hands. And now this recluse comes alone, unaccompa-
nied, as if driven by fate. Why shouldn't I take this recluse's
life?" Angulimala then took up his sword and shield, buckled
on his bow and quiver, and followed close behind the Blessed
One.
5. Then the Blessed One performed such a feat of supernormal
power that the bandit Angulimala, though walking as fast as he
could, could not catch up with the Blessed One, who was walk-
ing at his normal pace. Then the bandit Angulimala thought: "It
is wonderful, it is marvellous! Formerly I could catch up even
with a swift elephant and seize it; I could catch up even with a
swift horse and seize it; I could catch up even with a swift chariot
and seize it; I could catch up even with a swift deer and seize it;
but now, though I am walking as fast as I can, I cannot catch up
with this recluse who is walking at his normal pace!" He stopped
and called out to the Blessed One: "Stop, recluse! Stop, recluse!"
"I have stopped, Angulimala, you stop too."
Then the bandit Angulimala thought: "These recluses, sons of
the Sakyans, speak truth, assert truth; but though this recluse is
still walking, he says: 'I have stopped, Angulimala, you stop
too.' Suppose I question this recluse."
6. Then the bandit Angulimala addressed the Blessed One in
stanzas thus:

"While you are walking, recluse, you tell me you have
stopped;
But now, when I have stopped, you say I have not stopped.
I ask you now, O recluse, about the meaning:
How is it that you have stopped and I have not?"

"Angulimala, I have stopped forever,
I abstain from violence towards living beings;
But you have no restraint towards things that live:
That is why I have stopped and you have not." [100]

"Oh, at long last this recluse, a venerated sage,
Has come to this great forest for my sake.[821 ]
Having heard your stanza teaching me the Dhamma,
I will indeed renounce evil forever."

So saying, the bandit took his sword and weapons
And flung them in a gaping chasm's pit;
The bandit worshipped the Sublime One's feet,
And then and there asked for the going forth.

The Enlightened One, the Sage of Great Compassion,
The Teacher of the world with [all] its gods,
Addressed him with these words, "Come, bhikkhu."
And that was how he came to be a bhikkhu.[822 ]

7. Then the Blessed One set out to wander back to Savatthl
with Angulimala as his attendant. Wandering by stages, he
eventually arrived at Savatthl, and there he lived at Savatthl in
Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
8. Now on that occasion great crowds of people were gathering
at the gates of King Pasenadi's inner palace, very loud and noisy,
crying: "Sire, the bandit Angulimala is in your realm; he is mur-
derous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless
to living beings! Villages, towns, and districts have been laid
waste by him! He is constantly murdering people and he wears
their fingers as a garland! The king must put him down!"
9. Then in the middle of the day King Pasenadi of Kosala
drove out of Savatthl with a cavalry of five hundred men and
set out for the park. He drove thus as far as the road was pass-
able for carriages, and then he dismounted from his carriage
and went forward on fopt to the Blessed One. [101] After paying
homage to the Blessed One, he sat down at one side, and the
Blessed One said to him: "What is it, great king? Is King Seniya
Bimbisara of Magadha attacking you, or the Licchavis of Vesall,
or other hostile kings?"
10. "Venerable sir, King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha is not
attacking me, nor are the Licchavis of Vesall, nor are other hos-
tile kings. But there is a bandit in my realm named Angulimala,
who is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence,
merciless to living beings. Villages, towns, and districts have
been laid waste by him. He is constantly murdering people and
he wears their fingers as a garland. I shall never be able to put
him down, venerable sir."
11. "Great king, suppose you were to see that Angulimala had
shaved off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and gone

forth from the home life into homelessness; that he was abstain-
ing from killing living beings, from taking what is not given and
from false speech; that he was refraining from eating at night,
ate only in one part of the day, and was celibate, virtuous, of
good character. If you were to see him thus, how would you
treat him?"
"Venerable sir, we would pay homage to him, or rise up for
him, or invite him to be seated; or we would invite him to accept
robes, almsfood, a resting place, or medicinal requisites; or we
would arrange for him lawful guarding, defence, and protection.
But, venerable sir, he is an immoral man, one of evil character.
How could he ever have such virtue and restraint?"
12. Now on that occasion the venerable Angulimala was sit-
ting not far from the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One extended
his right arm and said to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Great king,
this is Angulimala."
Then King Pasenadi was frightened, alarmed, and terrified.
Knowing this, the Blessed One told him: "Do not be afraid,
great king, do not be afraid. There is nothing for you to fear
from him."
Then the king's fear, [102] alarm, and terror subsided. He
went over to the venerable Angulimala and said: "Venerable sir,
is the noble lord really Angulimala?"
"Yes, great king."
"Venerable sir, of what family is the noble lord's father? Of
what family is his mother?"
"My father is a Gagga, great king; my mother is a Mantani."
"Let the noble lord Gagga Mantaniputta rest content. I shall
provide robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites
for the noble lord Gagga Mantaniputta."
13. Now at that time the venerable Angulimala was a forest
dweller, an almsfood eater, a refuse-rag wearer, and restricted
himself to three robes. He replied: "Enough, great king, my
triple robe is complete."
King Pasenadi then returned to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: "It is
wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how the Blessed One
tames the untamed, brings peace to the unpeaceful, and leads to
Nibbana those who have not attained Nibbana. Venerable sir, we
ourselves could not tame him with force and weapons, yet the

Blessed One has tamed him without force or weapons. And now,
venerable sir, we depart. We are busy and have much to do."
"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.
14. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimala
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl
for alms. As he was wandering for alms from house to house in
Savatthl, he saw a certain woman giving birth to a deformed
child. [103] When he saw this, he thought: "How beings are
afflicted! Indeed, how beings are afflicted!"
When he had wandered for alms in Savatthl and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said:
"Venerable sir, in the morning I dressed, and taking my bowl
and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms. As I was wandering
for alms from house to house in Savatthl, I saw a certain woman
giving birth to a deformed child. When I saw that, I thought:
'How beings are afflicted! Indeed, how beings are afflicted!'"
15. "In that case, Angulimala, go into Savatthl and say to that
woman: 'Sister, since I was born, I do not recall that I have ever
intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this truth, may
you be well and may your infant be well!'"
"Venerable sir, wouldn't I be telling a deliberate lie, for I have
intentionally deprived many living beings of life?"
"Then, Angulimala, go into Savatthl and say to that woman:
'Sister, since I was born with the noble birth, I do not recall that I
have ever intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this
truth, may you be well and may your infant be well!'" [823 ]

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Angulimala replied, and
having gone into Savatthl, he told that woman: "Sister, since I
was born with the noble birth, I do not recall that I have ever
intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this truth, may
you be well and may your infant be well!" Then the woman and
the infant became well.
16. Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent,
and resolute, the venerable Angulimala, by realising for himself
with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided
in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which

clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
He directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been
lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more com-
ing to any state of being." [104] And the venerable Angulimala
became one of the arahants.
17. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimala
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI
for alms. Now on that occasion someone threw a clod and hit the
venerable Angulimala's body, someone else threw a stick and hit
his body, and someone else threw a potsherd and hit his body.
Then, with blood running from his cut head, with his bowl bro-
ken, and with his outer robe torn, the venerable Angulimala
went to the Blessed One. The Blessed One saw him coming in the
distance and told him: "Bear it, brahmin! Bear it, brahmin! You
are experiencing here and now the result of deeds because of
which you might have been tortured in hell for many years, for
many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years."[824 ]

18. Then, while the venerable Angulimala was alone in
retreat experiencing the bliss of deliverance, he uttered this
exclamation:[825 ]

"Who once did live in negligence
And then is negligent no more,
He illuminates the world
Like the moon freed from a cloud.

Who checks the evil deeds he did
By doing wholesome deeds instead,
He illuminates the world
Like the moon freed from a cloud.

The youthful bhikkhu who devotes
His efforts to the Buddha's teaching,
He illuminates the world
Like the moon freed from a cloud.

Let my enemies hear discourse on the Dhamma,
Let them be devoted to the Buddha's teaching,
Let my enemies wait on those good people
Who lead others to accept the Dhamma.

[105] Let my enemies give ear from time to time
And hear the Dhamma of those who preach forbearance,
Of those who speak as well in praise of kindness,
And let them follow up that Dhamma with kind deeds.

For surely then they would not wish to harm me,
Nor would they think of harming other beings,
So those who would protect all, frail or strong,
Let them attain the all-surpassing peace.

Conduit-makers guide the water,
Fletchers straighten out the arrow-shaft,
Carpenters straighten out the timber,
But wise men seek to tame themselves.

There are some that tame with beatings,
Some with goads and some with whips;
But I was tamed by such alone
Who has no rod nor any weapon.

'Harmless' is the name I bear,
Though I was dangerous in the past.[826 ]
The name I bear today is true:
I hurt no living being at all.

And though I once lived as a bandit
With the name of 'Finger-garland,'
One whom the great flood swept along,
I went for refuge to the Buddha.

And though I once was bloody-handed
With the name of 'Finger-garland,'
See the refuge I have found:
The bond of being has been cut.

While I did many deeds that lead
To rebirth in the evil realms,
Yet their result has reached me now,
And so I eat free from debt.[827 ]

They are fools and have no sense
Who give themselves to negligence,
But those of wisdom guard diligence
And treat it as their greatest good.

Do not give way to negligence
Nor seek delight in sensual pleasures,
But meditate with diligence
So as to reach the perfect bliss.

So welcome to that choice of mine
And let it stand, it was not ill made;
Of all the Dhammas known to men
I have come to the very best.

So welcome to that choice of mine
And let it stand, it was not ill made;
I have attained the triple knowledge
And done all that the Buddha teaches."
