###### 88 Bahitika Sutta

 The Cloak

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Ananda dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Savatthl and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Eastern Park,
to the Palace of Migara's Mother, for the day's abiding.
3. Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had mount-
ed the elephant Ekapundarika and was riding out from Savatthl
at midday. He saw the venerable Ananda coming in the distance
and asked the minister Sirivaddha: "That is the venerable
Ananda, is it not?" - "Yes, sire, that is the venerable Ananda."
4. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: "Come, good
man, go to the venerable Ananda and pay homage in my name
with your head at his feet, saying: 'Venerable sir, King Pasenadi
of Kosala pays homage with his head at the venerable Ananda's
feet.' Then say this: 'Venerable sir, if the venerable Ananda has
no urgent business, perhaps the venerable Ananda would wait

[113] a moment, out of compassion.'"
5. "Yes, sire," the man replied, and he went to the venerable
Ananda, and after paying homage to him, he stood at one side
and said to the venerable Ananda: "Venerable sir, King
Pasenadi of Kosala pays homage with his head at the venerable
Ananda's feet and he says this: 'Venerable sir, if the venerable
Ananda has no urgent business, perhaps the venerable Ananda
would wait a moment, out of compassion.'"
6. The venerable Ananda consented in silence. Then King
Pasenadi went by elephant as far as the elephant could go, and
then he dismounted and went to the venerable Ananda on foot.
After paying homage to him, he stood at one side and said to the

venerable Ananda: "If, venerable sir, the venerable Ananda has
no urgent business, it would be good if he would go to the bank
of the river Aciravati, out of compassion."
7. The venerable Ananda consented in silence. He went to the
bank of the river Aciravati and sat down at the root of a tree on a
seat made ready. Then King Pasenadi went by elephant as far as
the elephant could go, and then he dismounted and went to the
venerable Ananda on foot. After paying homage to him, he stood
at one side and said to the venerable Ananda: "Here, venerable
sir, is an elephant rug. Let the venerable Ananda be seated on it."
"There is no need, great king. Sit down. I am sitting on my
own mat."
8. King Pasenadi of Kosala sat down on a seat made ready and
said: "Venerable Ananda, would the Blessed One behave with
the body in such a way that he could be censured by wise reclus-
es and brahmins?"[831 ]

"No, great king, the Blessed One would not behave with the
body in such a way that he could be censured by wise recluses
and brahmins." [114]
"Would the Blessed One, venerable Ananda, behave with
speech.. .behave with the mind in such a way that he could be
censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"No, great king, the Blessed One would not behave with
speech.. .behave with the mind in such a way that he could be
censured by wise recluses and brahmins."
9. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous! For what we
were unable to accomplish with a question has been accom-
plished by the venerable Ananda with the answer to the ques-
tion. We do not recognise anything of value in the praise and
blame of others spoken by foolish ignorant persons, who speak
without having investigated and evaluated; but we recognise as
valuable the praise and blame of others spoken by wise, intelli-
gent, and sagacious persons who speak after having investigated
and evaluated.
10. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any bodily behaviour that is unwholesome, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
unwholesome?"
"Any bodily behaviour that is blameworthy, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
blameworthy? "
"Any bodily behaviour that brings affliction, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
brings affliction?"
"Any bodily behaviour that has painful results, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour has
painful results?"
"Any bodily behaviour, great king, that leads to one's own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both,
and on account of which unwholesome states increase and
wholesome states diminish. Such bodily behaviour is censured
by wise recluses and brahmins, great king." [832 ]

11. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of verbal behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any verbal behaviour that is unwholesome...(complete as in
_ยง10, substituting "verbal behaviour "for "bodily behaviour")..."_
12. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of mental behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any mental behaviour that is unwholesome...(complete as in
_ยง10, substituting "mental behaviour" for "bodily behaviour")_

[115]..."
13. "Now, venerable Ananda, does the Blessed One praise
only the abandoning of all unwholesome states?"
"The Tathagata, great king, has abandoned all unwholesome
states and he possesses wholesome states."[833 ]
14. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any bodily behaviour that is wholesome, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
wholesome?"
"Any bodily behaviour that is blameless, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
blameless?"
"Any bodily behaviour that does not bring affliction, great king."
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour does
not bring affliction?"
"Any bodily behaviour that has pleasant results, great king.".
"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour has
pleasant results?"

"Any bodily behaviour, great king, that does not lead to one's
own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both, and on account of which unwholesome states diminish
and wholesome states increase. Such bodily behaviour, great
king, is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins."
15. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of verbal behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any verbal behaviour that is wholesome... (complete as in ยง14,
_substituting "verbal behaviour" for "bodily behaviour")..."_
16. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of mental behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"
"Any mental behaviour that is wholesome... (complete _as in ยง14,_
_substituting "mental behaviour"for "bodily behaviour") [116]..."_
17. "Now, venerable Ananda, does the Blessed One praise
only the undertaking of all wholesome states?"
"The Tathagata, great king, has abandoned all unwholesome
states and possesses wholesome states."
18. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the venerable Ananda! And we are
satisfied and pleased by what has been so well expressed by
him. Venerable sir, we are so satisfied and pleased with what
has been so well expressed by the venerable Ananda that if the
elephant-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to him;
if the horse-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to
him; if the boon of a village were allowed to him, we would give
it to him. But we know, venerable sir, that these are not allow-
able for the venerable Ananda. But there is this cloak of mine,[834 ]
venerable sir, which was sent to me packed in a royal umbrella
case by King Ajatasattu of Magadha, sixteen hands long and
eight hands wide. Let the venerable Ananda accept it out of
compassion."
"It is not necessary, great king. My triple robe is complete." [117]
19. "Venerable sir, this river Aciravati has been seen both by
the venerable Ananda and by ourselves when a great cloud has
rained heavily on the mountains; then this river Aciravati over-
flows both its banks. So too, venerable sir, the venerable Ananda
can make a triple robe for himself out of this cloak, and he can
share out his old triple robe among his companions in the holy
life. In this way, our offering will overflow. Venerable sir, let the
venerable Ananda accept the cloak."

20. The venerable Ananda accepted the cloak. Then King
Pasenadi of Kosala said: "And now, venerable sir, we depart.
We are busy and have much to do."
"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Ananda's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the venerable Ananda, keeping him on his
right, he departed.
21. Then soon after he had left, the venerable Ananda went to
the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down
at one side, related to him his entire conversation with King
Pasenadi of Kosala, and presented the cloak to the Blessed One.
22. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "It is a gain,
bhikkhus, for King Pasenadi of Kosala, it is a great gain for King
Pasenadi of Kosala that he has had the opportunity of seeing
and paying respect to Ananda."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
