###### 90 Kannakatthala Sutta

 At Kannakatthala

L. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Ujuftna, in the Kannakatthala Deer Park.
2. Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived
at Ujunna for some business or other. Then he told a man:
"Come, good man, go to the Blessed One and pay homage in my
name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from
illness and affliction, and is healthy, strong, and abiding in com-
fort, saying: 'Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala pays
homage with his head at the Blessed One's feet, and he asks
whether the Blessed One is free from illness...and abiding in
comfort.' And say this: 'Venerable sir, today King Pasenadi of
Kosala will come to see the Blessed One after he has had his
breakfast.'"
"Yes, sire," the man replied, and he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
delivered his message.
3. The sisters Soma and Sakula[845] heard: "Today [126] King
Pasenadi of Kosala will go to see the Blessed One after he has
had his breakfast."
Then, while the meal was being served, the two sisters went to
the king and said: "Sire, pay homage in our name with your
head at the Blessed One's feet, and ask whether he is free from
illness...and abiding in comfort, saying: 'Venerable sir, the sis-
ters Soma and Sakula pay homage with their heads at the
Blessed One's feet, and they ask whether he is free from ill-
ness.. .and abiding in comfort."'
4. Then, when he had finished his breakfast, King Pasenadi of
Kosala went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to
him, he sat down at one side and delivered the message of the
sisters Soma and Sakula.

"But, great king, could the sisters Soma and Sakula find no
other messenger?"
"Venerable sir, the sisters Soma and Sakula heard: 'Today King
Pasenadi of Kosala will go to see the Blessed One after he has
had his breakfast.' Then, while the meal was being served/the
sisters Soma and Sakula came to me and said: 'Sire, pay homage
in our names with your head at the Blessed One's feet, and ask
whether he is free from illness.. .and abiding in comfort.'"
"May the sisters Soma and Sakula be happy, great king."
5. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, I have heard this: 'The recluse Gotama says:
"There is no recluse or brahmin who is omniscient and all-seeing,
who can claim to have complete knowledge and vision; that is not
possible.'" Venerable sir, do those who speak thus [127] say what
has been said by the Blessed One, and not misrepresent him with
what is contrary to fact? Do they explain in accordance with the
Dhamma in such a way that nothing that provides a ground for
censure can be legitimately deduced from their assertions?"
"Great King, those who speak thus do not say what has been
said by me, but misrepresent me with what is untrue and con-
trary to fact."
6. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala addressed General
Vidudabha: "General, who introduced this story into the palace?"
"It was Sanjaya, sire, the brahmin of the Akasa clan."
7. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: "Come, good
man, in my name tell Sanjaya, the brahmin of the Akasa clan:
'Venerable sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala calls you.'"
"Yes, sire," the man replied. He went to Sanjaya, the brahmin
of the Akasa clan, and told him: "Venerable sir, King Pasenadi
of Kosala calls you."
8. Meanwhile King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, could something else have been said by the
Blessed One referring to that, and the person understood it
wrongly? In what way does the Blessed One recall making that
utterance?"
"I recall having actually made the utterance in this way, great
king: 'There is no recluse or brahmin who knows all, who sees
all, simultaneously; that is not possible.'"[846 ]
"What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what the
Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason: 'There

is no recluse or brahmin [128] who knows all, who sees all,
simultaneously; that is not possible.'"
9. "There are these four castes, venerable sir: the nobles, the
brahmins, the merchants, and the workers. Is there any distinc-
tion or difference among them?"
"There are these four castes, great king: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Two of them, that is, the
nobles and the brahmins, are held to be superior since men pay
homage to them, rise up for them, and accord them reverential
salutation and polite services."
10. "Venerable sir, I was not asking about this present life; I
was asking about the life to come.[847] There are these four castes,
venerable sir: the nobles, the brahmins, the merchants, and the
workers. Is there any distinction or difference among them?"
"Great king, there are these five factors of striving.[848] What
five? Here a bhikkhu has faith, he places his faith in the
Tathagata's enlightenment thus: 'The Blessed One is accom-
plished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of per-
sons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed.' Then he is free from illness and affliction, possessing a
good digestion that is neither too cool nor too warm but medi-
um and able to bear the strain of striving. Then he is honest and
sincere, and shows himself as he actually is to his teacher and
his companions in the holy life. Then he is energetic in abandon-
ing unwholesome states and in undertaking wholesome states,
steadfast, launching his effort with firmness and persevering in
cultivating wholesome states. Then he is wise; he possesses wis-
dom regarding rise and disappearance that is noble and pene-
trative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering. These
are the five factors of striving.
"There are these four castes, great king: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Now if they possessed
these five factors of striving, it would lead to their welfare and
happiness for a long time."
11. "Venerable sir, there are these four castes: the nobles, the
brahmins, the merchants, [129] and the workers. Now if they
possessed these five factors of striving, would there be any dif-
ference among them here in that respect?"

"Here, great king, I say that the difference among them would
lie in the diversity of their striving. Suppose there were two
tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were
well tamed and well disciplined, and two tamable elephants or
tamable horses or tamable oxen that were untamed and undisci-
plined. What do you think, great king? Would the two tamable
elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were well
tamed and well disciplined, being tamed, acquire the behaviour
of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed?"
"Yes, venerable sir."
"And would the two tamable elephants or tamable horses or
tamable oxen that were untamed and undisciplined, being
untamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive
at the grade of the tamed, like the two elephants or horses or
oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined?"
"No, venerable sir."
"So too, great king, it is not possible that what can be achieved
by one who has faith, who is free from illness, who is honest and
sincere, who is energetic, and who is wise, can be achieved by
one who has no faith, who has much illness, who is fraudulent
and deceitful, who is lazy, and who is not wise."
12. "What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what
the Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason.
"There are these four castes, venerable sir: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Now if they possessed
these five factors of striving, and if their striving was right,
would there be any difference among them in that respect?"
"Here, great king, in this respect I say that among them there
is no difference, that is, between the deliverance of one and the
deliverance of the others. Suppose a man took dry saka wood, lit
a fire, and produced heat; and then another man took dry sala
wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; [130] and then another man
took dry mango wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; and then
another man took dry fig wood, lit a fire, and produced heat.
What do you think, great king? Would there be any difference
among these fires lit with different kinds of wood, that is,
between the flame of one and the flames of the others, or
between the colour of one and the colours of the others, or
between the radiance of one and the radiances of the others?"

"No, venerable sir."
"So too, great king, when a fire is kindled by energy, lit by
striving, there is, I say, no difference, that is, between the deliv-
erance of one and the deliverance of the others."
13. "What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what
the Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason.
But, venerable sir, how is it: are there gods?"
"Why do you ask that, great king?"
"Venerable sir, I was asking whether those gods come back to
this [human] state or whether they do not."
"Great king, those gods who are still subject to affliction come
back to this [human] state, those gods who are no longer subject
to affliction do not come back to this [human] state."[849 ]
14. When this was said, General Vidudabha asked the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, can those gods who are still subject to
affliction and who come back to this [human] state topple or
banish from that place those gods who are no longer subject to
affliction and who do not come back to this [human] state?"
Then the venerable Ananda thought: "This General Viduda-
bha is the son of King Pasenadi of Kosala, and I am the son of
the Blessed One. This is the time for one son to talk with the
other." He said to General Vidudabha: "General, I shall ask you
a question in return. Answer it as you choose. General, what do
you think? There is the whole extent of King Pasenadi of
Kosala's realm, where [131] he exercises lordship and sovereignty;
now can King Pasenadi of Kosala topple or banish from that
place any recluse or brahmin, irrespective of whether that
recluse or brahmin has merit or not and whether he leads the
holy life or not?"
"He can do so, sir."
"What do you think, general? There is the whole extent that is
not King Pasenadi of Kosala's realm, where he does not exercise
lordship and sovereignty; now can King Pasenadi of Kosala top-
ple or banish from that place any recluse or brahmin, irrespec-
tive of whether that recluse or brahmin has merit or not and
whether he leads the holy life or not?"
"He cannot do so, sir."
"General, what do you think? Have you heard of the gods of
the Thirty-three?"

"Yes, sir, I have heard of them. And King Pasenadi of Kosala
has heard of them too."
"General, what do you think? Can King Pasenadi of Kosala top-
ple the gods of the Thirty-three or banish them from that place?"
"Sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala cannot even see the gods of the
Thirty-three, so how could he topple them or banish them from
that place?"
"So too, general, those gods who are still subject to affliction
and who come back to this [human] state cannot even see those
gods who are no longer subject to affliction and who do not
come back to this [human] state; so how could they topple them
or banish them from that place?"
15. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, what is this bhikkhu's name?"
"His name is Ananda, great king."
"Ananda [joy] he is indeed, venerable sir, and Ananda he
appears. What [132] the venerable Ananda has said appears rea-
sonable, what he has said appears to be supported by reason.
But, venerable sir, how is it: are there Brahmas?"
"Why do you ask that, great king?"
"Venerable sir, I was asking whether those Brahmas come
back to this [human] state or whether they do not."
"Great king, any Brahma who is still subject to affliction
comes back to this [human] state, any Brahma who is no longer
subject to affliction does not come back to this [human] state."
16. Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Great
king, Sanjaya, the brahmin of the Akasa clan, has come."
King Pasenadi of Kosala asked Sanjaya, the brahmin of the
Akasa clan: "Brahmin, who introduced this story to the palace?"
"Sire, it was General Vidudabha."
General Vidudabha said: "Sire, it was Sanjaya, the brahmin of
the Akasa clan."
17. Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Sire,
it is time to depart."
King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One: "Venerable
sir, we have asked the Blessed One about omniscience, and the
Blessed One has answered about omniscience; we approve of
and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied. We have asked
the Blessed One about purification in the four castes, and the

Blessed One has answered about purification in the four castes;
we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We have asked the Blessed One about the gods, and the Blessed
One has answered about the gods; we approve of and accept
that answer, and so we are satisfied. We have asked the Blessed
One about the Brahmas, and the Blessed One has answered
about the Brahmas; we approve of and accept that answer, and
so we are satisfied. Whatever we asked the Blessed One, that the
Blessed One has answered; we approve of and accept those
answers, and so we are satisfied. [133] And now, venerable sir,
we depart. We are busy and have much to do."
"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."
18. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.
