# DN 15 The Great Discourse on Causation

_**Mahānidānasutta**_

## 1. Dependent Origination

So I have heard.[^161] At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named
Kammāsadamma.[^162]

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him,[^163] "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, in
that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it
seems as plain as can be."[^164]

"Don't say that, Ānanda, don't say that! This dependent origination is
deep and appears deep.[^165] It is because of not understanding and not
penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like
string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds,
and it doesn't escape the places of loss, the bad places, the
underworld, transmigration.[^166]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for old age and death?' you
should answer, 'There is.'[^167] If they say, 'What is a condition for
old age and death?' you should answer, 'Rebirth is a condition for old
age and death.'[^168]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for rebirth?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for rebirth?' you
should answer, 'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.'[^169]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for continued existence?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
continued existence?' you should answer, 'Grasping is a condition for
continued existence.'[^170]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for grasping?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for grasping?' you
should answer, 'Craving is a condition for grasping.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for craving?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for craving?' you
should answer, 'Feeling is a condition for craving.'[^171]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for feeling?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for feeling?' you
should answer, 'Contact is a condition for feeling.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for contact?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for contact?' you
should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for contact.'[^172]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for name and form?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for name
and form?' you should answer, 'Consciousness is a condition for name and
form.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for consciousness?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
consciousness?' you should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for
consciousness.'[^173]

So: name and form are conditions for consciousness. Consciousness is a
condition for name and form. Name and form are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving.
Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for
continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress to come to be.[^174] That is how this entire mass
of suffering originates.

'Rebirth is a condition for old age and death'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so.[^175] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no rebirth for anyone anywhere.[^176] That is, there
were no rebirth of sentient beings into their various realms---of gods,
centaurs, spirits, creatures, humans, quadrupeds, birds, or reptiles,
each into their own realm. When there's no rebirth at all, with the
cessation of rebirth, would old age and death still be found?"[^177]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of old age and
death, namely rebirth.[^178]

'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no continued existence for anyone anywhere. That is,
continued existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, or
the formless realm. When there's no continued existence at all, with the
cessation of continued existence, would rebirth still be found?"[^179]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of rebirth,
namely continued existence.

'Grasping is a condition for continued existence'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no grasping for anyone anywhere. That is, grasping
at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self. When there's no grasping at all, with the cessation of grasping,
would continued existence still be found?"[^180]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of continued
existence, namely grasping.

'Craving is a condition for grasping'---that's what I said. And this is
a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and
utterly no craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. When there's no craving at
all, with the cessation of craving, would grasping still be
found?"[^181]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of grasping,
namely craving.

'Feeling is a condition for craving'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no feeling for anyone anywhere. That is, feeling born of contact through
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no feeling at
all, with the cessation of feeling, would craving still be found?"[^182]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of craving,
namely feeling.

So it is, Ānanda, that feeling is a cause of craving. Craving is a cause
of seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material things. Gaining
material things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is a cause of
desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment. Attachment is
a cause of ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess. Stinginess is
a cause of safeguarding.[^183] Owing to safeguarding, many bad,
unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels,
arguments, and disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and lies.[^184]

'Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking
up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes,
accusations, divisive speech, and lies'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^185] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no safeguarding for anyone anywhere. When there's no
safeguarding at all, with the cessation of safeguarding, would those
many bad, unskillful things still come to be?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason for the
origination of those many bad, unskillful things, namely safeguarding.

'Stinginess is a cause of safeguarding'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^186] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no stinginess for anyone anywhere. When there's no
stinginess at all, with the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding
still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
safeguarding, namely stinginess.

'Ownership is a cause of stinginess'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no ownership for anyone anywhere. When there's no ownership at all, with
the cessation of ownership, would stinginess still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of stinginess,
namely ownership.

'Attachment is a cause of ownership'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so.[^187] Suppose there were totally and
utterly no attachment for anyone anywhere. When there's no attachment at
all, with the cessation of attachment, would ownership still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of ownership,
namely attachment.

'Desire and lust is a cause of attachment'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally
and utterly no desire and lust for anyone anywhere. When there's no
desire and lust at all, with the cessation of desire and lust, would
attachment still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of attachment,
namely desire and lust.

Evaluation is a cause of desire and lust'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^188] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no evaluation for anyone anywhere. When there's no
evaluation at all, with the cessation of evaluation, would desire and
lust still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of desire and
lust, namely evaluation.

'Gaining material things is a cause of evaluation'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^189] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no gaining of material things for anyone anywhere.
When there's no gaining of material things at all, with the cessation of
gaining material things, would evaluation still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of evaluation,
namely the gaining of material things.

'Seeking is a cause of gaining material things'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^190] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no seeking for anyone anywhere. When there's no
seeking at all, with the cessation of seeking, would the gaining of
material things still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of gaining
material things, namely seeking.

'Craving is a cause of seeking'---that's what I said. And this is a way
to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly no
craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving for continued existence, and craving to end existence. When
there's no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would seeking
still be found?"[^191]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of seeking,
namely craving. And so, Ānanda, these two things are united by the two
aspects of feeling.[^192]

'Contact is a condition for feeling'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so.[^193] Suppose there were totally and
utterly no contact for anyone anywhere. That is, contact through the
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no contact at all,
with the cessation of contact, would feeling still be found?"[^194]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of feeling,
namely contact.

'Name and form are conditions for contact'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so.[^195] Suppose there were
none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of
mental phenomena known as name is found. Would labeling contact still be
found in the set of physical phenomena?"[^196]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of physical phenomena known as form is found. Would
impingement contact still be found in the set of mental
phenomena?"[^197]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of phenomena known as name and the set of phenomena
known as form are found. Would either labeling contact or impingement
contact still be found?"[^198]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which name and form are found. Would contact still be found?"[^199]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of contact,
namely name and form.

'Consciousness is a condition for name and form'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^200] If consciousness
were not conceived in the mother's womb, would name and form coagulate
there?"[^201]

"No, sir."

"If consciousness, after being conceived in the mother's womb, were to
be miscarried, would name and form be born into this place?"[^202]

"No, sir."

"If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would
name and form achieve growth, increase, and maturity?"[^203]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of name and
form, namely consciousness.

'Name and form are conditions for consciousness'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^204] If consciousness
were not to gain a footing in name and form, would the coming to be of
the origin of suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the
future---be found?"[^205]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
consciousness, namely name and form. This is the extent to which one may
be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear.[^206] This is how far
the scope of labeling, terminology, and description extends; how far the
sphere of wisdom extends; how far the cycle of rebirths proceeds so that
this state of being may be found; namely, name and form together with
consciousness.[^207]

## 2. Describing the Self

How do those who describe the self describe it?[^208] They describe it
as formed and limited:[^209] 'My self is formed and limited.'[^210] Or
they describe it as formed and infinite: 'My self is formed and
infinite.'[^211] Or they describe it as formless and limited: 'My self
is formless and limited.'[^212] Or they describe it as formless and
infinite: 'My self is formless and infinite.'[^213]

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and limited. They
describe the self in the present as formed and limited; or they describe
it as sure to be in some other place formed and limited; or else they
think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with
what it needs to become like that.'[^214] This being so, it's
appropriate to say that a view of self as formed and limited underlies
them.[^215]

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and infinite ...
formless and limited ... formless and infinite. They describe the self
as formless and infinite in the present; or as sure to become formless
and infinite in some other place; or else they think: 'Though it is not
like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become
like that.' This being so, it's appropriate to say that a view of self
as formless and infinite underlies them. That's how those who describe
the self describe it.

## 3. Not Describing the Self

How do those who don't describe the self not describe it?[^216] They
don't describe it as formed and limited ... formed and infinite ...
formless and limited ... formless and infinite: 'My self is formless and
infinite.'

Now, take those who don't describe the self as formed and limited ...
formed and infinite ... formless and limited ... formless and infinite.
They don't describe the self in the present as formless and infinite; or
as sure to become in some other place formless and infinite; and they
don't think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided
with what it needs to become like that.' This being so, it's appropriate
to say that a view of self as formless and infinite doesn't underlie
them. That's how those who don't describe the self don't describe it.

## 4. Regarding a Self

How do those who regard the self regard it?[^217] They regard feeling as
self:[^218] 'Feeling is my self.'[^219] Or they regard it like this:
'Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience
feeling.'[^220] Or they regard it like this: 'Feeling is definitely not
my self. But it's not that my self does not experience feeling. My self
feels, for my self is liable to feel.'[^221]

Now, as to those who say:[^222] 'Feeling is my self.' You should say
this to them: 'Reverend, there are three feelings: pleasant, painful,
and neutral.[^223] Which one of these do you regard as self?' Ānanda, at
a time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don't feel a painful or
neutral feeling;[^224] you only feel a pleasant feeling. At a time when
you feel a painful feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or neutral
feeling; you only feel a painful feeling. At a time when you feel a
neutral feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or painful feeling; you only
feel a neutral feeling.

Pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neutral feelings are all
impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish,
fade away, and cease. When feeling a pleasant feeling they think: 'This
is my self.' When their pleasant feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a painful feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their painful feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a neutral feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their neutral feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' So those who say 'feeling is my self' regard as self that
which is evidently impermanent, mixed with pleasure and pain, and liable
to rise and fall. That's why it's not acceptable to regard feeling as
self.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. My self
does not experience feeling.' You should say this to them, 'But
reverend, where there is nothing felt at all, would the thought "I am"
occur there?'"[^225]

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which does not
experience feeling.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. But it's
not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self
is liable to feel.' You should say this to them, 'Suppose feelings were
to totally and utterly cease without anything left over. When there's no
feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought "I am
this" occur there?'"[^226]

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which is liable
to feel.

Not regarding anything in this way, they don't grasp at anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become extinguished.[^227] They understand: 'Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place.'

It wouldn't be appropriate to say that a mendicant whose mind is freed
like this holds the following views: 'A realized one still exists after
death'; 'A realized one no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
both still exists and no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
neither still exists nor no longer exists after death'.

Why is that? A mendicant is freed by directly knowing this: how far
labeling and the scope of labeling extend; how far terminology and the
scope of terminology extend; how far description and the scope of
description extend; how far wisdom and the sphere of wisdom extend; how
far the cycle of rebirths and its continuation extend. It wouldn't be
appropriate to say that a mendicant freed by directly knowing this holds
the view: 'There is no such thing as knowing and seeing.'[^228]

## 5. Planes of Consciousness

Ānanda, there are seven planes of consciousness and two
dimensions.[^229] What seven?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first plane of consciousness.[^230]

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

Then there is the dimension of non-percipient beings, and secondly, the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.[^231]

Now, regarding these seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions,
is it appropriate for someone who understands them---and their origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape---to take pleasure in
them?"[^232]

"No, sir."

"When a mendicant, having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape regarding these seven planes of
consciousness and these two dimensions, is freed by not grasping,
they're called a mendicant who is freed by wisdom.[^233]

## 6. The Eight Liberations

Ānanda, there are these eight liberations.[^234] What eight?

Having physical form, they see forms.[^235] This is the first
liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally.[^236] This is
the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty.[^237] This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling.[^238] This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations.

When a mendicant enters into and withdraws from these eight
liberations---in forward order, in reverse order, and in forward and
reverse order---wherever they wish, whenever they wish, and for as long
as they wish;[^239] and when they realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, they're called
a mendicant who is freed both ways.[^240] And, Ānanda, there is no other
freedom both ways that is better or finer than this."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

