# DN 23 With Pāyāsi

_**Pāyāsisutta**_

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time Venerable Kassapa the Prince
was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large
Saṅgha of five hundred mendicants when he arrived at a
Kosalan citadel named Setavyā.[^912] He stayed in the grove
of Indian Rosewood to the north of Setavyā.[^913]

Now at that time the chieftain Pāyāsi was living in
Setavyā. It was a crown property given by King Pasenadi of
Kosala, teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and
grain, a royal park endowed to a brahmin.[^914]

## 1. On Pāyāsi

Now at that time Pāyāsi had the following harmful
misconception: "There is no afterlife. No beings are reborn
spontaneously. There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds."[^915]

The brahmins and householders of Setavyā heard, "It seems
the ascetic Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is
staying in the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of
Setavyā. He has this good reputation: 'He is astute,
competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature,
a perfected one.' It's good to see such perfected ones." Then, having
departed Setavyā, they formed into companies and headed
north to the grove.

Now at that time the chieftain Pāyāsi had retired to the
upper floor of his stilt longhouse for his midday nap. He saw the
brahmins and householders heading north towards the grove, and addressed
his butler, "My butler, why are the brahmins and householders heading
north towards the grove?"

"The ascetic Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is
staying in the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of
Setavyā. He has this good reputation: 'He is astute,
competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature,
a perfected one.' They're going to see that Kassapa the Prince."

"Well then, go to the brahmins and householders and say to them: 'Sirs,
the chieftain Pāyāsi asks you to wait, as he will also go
to see the ascetic Kassapa the Prince.' Before Kassapa the Prince
convinces those foolish and incompetent brahmins and householders that
there is an afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there
is a fruit or result of good and bad deeds---for none of these things
are true!"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

Then Pāyāsi escorted by the brahmins and householders, went
up to Kassapa the Prince, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.
Before sitting down to one side, some of the brahmins and householders
of Setavyā bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite
conversation, some held up their joined palms toward Kassapa the Prince,
some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

## 2. Nihilism

Seated to one side, the chieftain Pāyāsi said to Venerable
Kassapa the Prince, "Mister Kassapa, this is my doctrine and view:
'There is no afterlife. No beings are reborn spontaneously. There's no
fruit or result of good and bad deeds.'"

"Chieftain, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view![^916] For how on earth can anyone say such a thing?

### 2.1. The Simile of the Moon and Sun

Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Are the moon and sun
in this world or the other world? Are they gods or humans?"

"They are in the other world, Mister Kassapa, and they are gods, not
humans."[^917]

"By this method it ought to be proven that[^918] there is an afterlife,
there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of
good and bad deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife, no beings are reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or
result of good and bad deeds."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who kill living
creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious,
with wrong view. Some time later they become sick, suffering, gravely
ill. When I know that they will not recover from their illness, I go to
them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view: "Those who kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are covetous, malicious, and have wrong view---when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell." You do all these things. If what those
ascetics and brahmins say is true, when your body breaks up, after
death, you'll be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that there is an
afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. I trust you and believe you. Anything
you see will be just as if I've seen it for myself.'[^919] They agree to
this. But they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger.
This is the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife, no
beings are reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good
and bad deeds."[^920]

### 2.2. The Simile of the Bandit

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Suppose they were to
arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to you, saying, 'Sir, this
is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' Then you'd say to
them, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly behind his back
with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from street to street
and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum. Then take him out
the south gate and there, at the place of execution to the south of the
city, chop off his head.' Saying, 'Good,' they'd do as they were told,
sitting him down at the place of execution. Could that bandit get the
executioners to wait, saying, 'Please, good executioners! I have friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin in such and such village or town. Wait
until I've visited them, then I'll come back'? Or would they just chop
off his head as he prattled on?"[^921]

"They'd just chop off his head."

"So even a human bandit couldn't get his human executioners to stay his
execution. What then of your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin
who are reborn in a lower realm after doing bad things? Could they get
the wardens of hell to wait, saying, 'Please, good wardens of hell! Wait
until I've gone to the chieftain Pāyāsi to tell him that
there is an afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there
is a fruit or result of good and bad deeds'? By this method, too, it
ought to be proven that[^922] there is an afterlife, there are beings
reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and bad
deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual misconduct.
They refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical.
And they're content, kind-hearted, with right view. Some time later they
become sick, suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not
recover from their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who
refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual
misconduct; who refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are content, kind-hearted, with right view---when their
body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm." You do all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say
is true, when your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me
that there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you
see will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

### 2.3. The Simile of the Sewer

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose there were a man sunk over his head in a sewer. Then you were to
order someone to pull him out of the sewer, and they'd agree to do so.
Then you'd tell them to carefully scrape the dung off that man's body
with bamboo scrapers, and they'd agree to do so. Then you'd tell them to
carefully scrub that man's body down with pale clay three times, and
they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to smear that man's body with oil,
and carefully wash him down with fine paste three times, and they'd do
so. Then you'd tell them to dress that man's hair and beard, and they'd
do so. Then you'd tell them to provide that man with costly garlands,
makeup, and clothes, and they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to bring
that man up to the stilt longhouse and set him up with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation, and they'd do so.

What do you think, chieftain? Now that man is nicely bathed and
anointed, with hair and beard dressed, bedecked with garlands and
bracelets, dressed in white, supplied and provided with the five kinds
of sensual stimulation upstairs in the royal longhouse. Would he want to
dive back into that sewer again?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. Why is that? Because that sewer is filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and it's regarded as such."

"In the same way, chieftain, to the gods, human beings are filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and are regarded as such. The smell
of humans reaches the gods even a hundred leagues away.[^923] What then
of your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who are reborn in a
higher realm after doing good things? Will they come back to tell you
that there is an afterlife? By this method, too, it ought to be proven
that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on. Some time later they become sick,
suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not recover from
their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and
brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the thirty-three." You do
all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say is true, when
your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in the company of the
gods of the thirty-three. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that
there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you see
will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
how I prove that there is no afterlife."

### 2.4. The Simile of the gods of the thirty-three

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. A hundred human years are equivalent to one day and
night for the gods of the thirty-three. Thirty such days make a month,
and twelve months make a year. The gods of the thirty-three have a
lifespan of a thousand such years.[^924] Now, as to your friends who are
reborn in the company of the gods of the thirty-three after doing good
things. If they think, 'First I'll amuse myself for two or three days,
supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual
stimulation. Then I'll go back to Pāyāsi and tell him that
there is an afterlife.' Would they come back to tell you that there is
an afterlife?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. For I would be long dead by then.[^925] But Mister
Kassapa, who has told you that the gods of the thirty-three exist, or
that they have such a long lifespan? I don't believe you."[^926]

### 2.5. Blind From Birth

"Chieftain, suppose there was a person blind from birth. They couldn't
see sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta.
They couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and
sun. They'd say, 'There's no such thing as dark and bright sights, and
no-one who sees them. There's no such thing as blue, yellow, red,
magenta, even and uneven ground, stars, moon and sun, and no-one who
sees these things. I don't know it or see it, therefore it doesn't
exist.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. There are such things as dark and bright sights,
and one who sees them. And those other things are real, too, as is the
one who sees them. So it's not right to say this: 'I don't know it or
see it, therefore it doesn't exist.'"

"In the same way, chieftain, when you tell me you don't believe me you
seem like the blind man in the simile. You can't see the other world the
way you think, with the eye of the flesh.[^927] There are ascetics and
brahmins who live in the wilderness, frequenting remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest. Meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, they
purify the heavenly eye, the power of clairvoyance. With clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, they see this world and the other
world, and sentient beings who are spontaneously reborn. That's how to
see the other world, not how you think, with the eye of the flesh. By
this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I see ascetics and brahmins who are ethical, of good character,
who want to live and don't want to die, who want to be happy and recoil
from pain. I think to myself, 'If those ascetics and brahmins knew that
things were going to be better for them after death, they'd drink
poison, take their lives, hang themselves, or throw themselves off a
cliff. They mustn't know that things are going to be better for them
after death. That's why they are ethical, of good character, wanting to
live and not wanting to die, wanting to be happy and recoiling from
pain.' This is the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

### 2.6. The Simile of the Pregnant Woman

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain brahmin had two wives. One had a son ten or
twelve years of age, while the other was pregnant and about to give
birth. Then the brahmin passed away.

So the youth said to his mother's co-wife, 'Madam, all the money, grain,
silver, and gold is mine, and you get nothing. Transfer to me my
father's inheritance.'

But the brahmin lady said, 'Wait, my dear, until I give birth. If it's a
boy, one portion shall be his. If it's a girl, she will be your
reward.'[^928]

But for a second time, and a third time, the youth insisted that the
entire inheritance must be his.

So the brahmin lady took a knife, went to her bedroom, and sliced open
her belly, thinking,[^929] 'Until I give birth---whether it's a boy or a
girl!'[^930] She destroyed her own life and that of the fetus, as well
as any wealth.

Being foolish and incompetent, she sought an inheritance irrationally
and fell to ruin and disaster. In the same way, chieftain, being foolish
and incompetent, you're seeking the other world irrationally and will
fall to ruin and disaster,[^931] just like that brahmin lady. Good
ascetics and brahmins don't force what is unripe to ripen; rather, they
wait for it to ripen. For the life of clever ascetics and brahmins is
beneficial. So long as they remain, good ascetics and brahmins produce
much merit, and act for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans. By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an
afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, place this man in a pot while he's still
alive. Close up the mouth, bind it up with damp leather, and seal it
with a thick coat of damp clay. Then lift it up on a stove and light the
fire.'[^932] They agree, and do what I ask. When we know that that man
has passed away, we lift down the pot and break it open, uncover the
mouth, and slowly peek inside, thinking, 'Hopefully we'll see his soul
escaping.'[^933] But we don't see his soul escaping. This is how I prove
that there is no afterlife."

### 2.7. The Simile of the Dream

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. Do you recall ever having a midday nap and seeing
delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds in a dream?"[^934]

"I do, sir."

"At that time were you guarded by hunchbacks, dwarves, midgets, and
younglings?"

"I was."

"But did they see your soul entering or leaving?"[^935]

"No they did not."

"So if they couldn't even see your soul entering or leaving while you
were still alive, how could you see the soul of a dead man? By this
method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife, there are
beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and
bad deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, weigh this man with scales while he's
still alive. Then strangle him with a bowstring, and when he's dead,
weigh him again.'[^936] They agree, and do what I ask. So long as they
are alive, they're lighter, softer, more flexible. But when they die
they become heavier, stiffer, less flexible.[^937] This is how I prove
that there is no afterlife."

### 2.8. The Simile of the Hot Iron Ball

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose a person was to heat an iron ball all day until it was burning,
blazing, and glowing, and then they weigh it with scales. After some
time, when it had cooled and become quenched, they'd weigh it again.
When would that iron ball be lighter, softer, and more workable---when
it's burning or when it's cool?"[^938]

"So long as the iron ball is full of heat and air---burning, blazing,
and glowing---it's lighter, softer, and more workable. But when it lacks
heat and air---cooled and quenched---it's heavier, stiffer, and less
workable."

"In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it's lighter, softer, and more flexible. But when it lacks
life and warmth and consciousness it's heavier, stiffer, and less
flexible. By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an
afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, take this man's life without injuring his
outer skin, inner skin, flesh, sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll
see his soul escaping.' They agree, and do what I ask. When he's nearly
dead, I tell them to[^939] lay him on his back in hope of seeing his
soul escape. They do so. But we don't see his soul escaping. I tell them
to lay him bent over, to lay him on his side, to lay him on the other
side; to stand him upright, to stand him upside down; to strike him with
fists, stones, rods, and swords; and to give him a good shaking in hope
of seeing his soul escape. They do all these things. But we don't see
his soul escaping. For him the eye itself is present, and so are those
sights. Yet he does not experience that sense-field.[^940] The ear
itself is present, and so are those sounds. Yet he does not experience
that sense-field. The nose itself is present, and so are those smells.
Yet he does not experience that sense-field. The tongue itself is
present, and so are those tastes. Yet he does not experience that
sense-field. The body itself is present, and so are those touches. Yet
he does not experience that sense-field. This is how I prove that there
is no afterlife."

### 2.9. The Simile of the Horn Blower

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain horn blower took his horn and traveled to a
borderland,[^941] where he went to a certain village. Standing in the
middle of the village, he sounded his horn three times, then placed it
on the ground and sat down to one side.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'What is making this sound,
so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and captivating?' They
gathered around the horn blower and said, 'Mister, what is making this
sound, so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and
captivating?'

'The sound is made by this, which is called a horn.'

They laid that horn on its back, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good
horn!' But still the horn made no sound.

Then they lay the horn bent over, they lay it on its side, they lay it
on its other side; they stood it upright, they stood it upside down;
they struck it with fists, stones, rods, and swords; and they gave it a
good shake, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good horn!' But still the
horn made no sound.

So the horn blower thought, 'How foolish are these borderland folk! For
how can they seek the sound of a horn so irrationally?' And as they
looked on, he picked up the horn, sounded it three times, and took it
away with him.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'So, it seems, when what is
called a horn is accompanied by a person, effort, and wind, it makes a
sound. But when these things are absent it makes no sound.'

In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it walks back and forth, stands, sits, and lies down. It
sees sights with the eye, hears sounds with the ear, smells odors with
the nose, tastes flavors with the tongue, feels touches with the body,
and knows ideas with the mind. But when it lacks life and warmth and
consciousness it does none of these things. By this method, too, it
ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open this man's outer skin. Hopefully
we might see his soul.' They cut open his outer skin, but we see no
soul. I say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open his inner skin, flesh,
sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll see his soul.' They do so, but
we see no soul. This is how I prove that there is no afterlife."

### 2.10. The Simile of the Fire-Worshiping Matted-Hair Ascetic

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain fire-worshiping matted-hair ascetic settled
in a leaf hut in a wilderness region. Then a caravan came out from a
certain country. It stayed for one night not far from that ascetic's
hermitage, and then moved on. The ascetic thought, 'Why don't I go to
that caravan's campsite? Hopefully I'll find something useful there.'

So he went, and he saw a little baby boy abandoned there. When he saw
this he thought, 'It's not proper for me to look on while a human being
dies. Why don't I bring this boy back to my hermitage, nurse him,
provide for him, and raise him?' So that's what he did.

When the boy was ten or twelve years old, the ascetic had some business
come up in the country. So he said to the boy, 'My dear, I wish to go to
the country. Serve the sacred flame. Do not extinguish it. But if you
should extinguish it, here is the hatchet, the firewood, and the bundle
of drill-sticks. Light the fire and serve it.' And having instructed the
boy, the ascetic went to the country.

But the boy was so engrossed in his play, the fire went out. He thought,
'My father told me to serve the sacred flame. Why don't I light it again
and serve it?'

So he chopped the bundle of drill-sticks with the hatchet, thinking,
'Hopefully I'll get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

He split the bundle of drill-sticks into two, three, four, five, ten, or
a hundred parts. He chopped them into splinters, pounded them in a
mortar, and swept them away in a strong wind, thinking, 'Hopefully I'll
get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

Then the matted-hair ascetic, having concluded his business in the
country, returned to his own hermitage, and said to the boy, 'I trust,
my dear, that the fire didn't go out?' And the boy told him what had
happened. Then the ascetic thought, 'How foolish is this boy, how
incompetent! For how can he seek a fire so irrationally?'

So while the boy looked on, he took a bundle of fire-sticks, lit the
fire, and said, 'Dear boy, this is how to light a fire. Not the foolish
and incompetent way you sought it so irrationally.' In the same way,
chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you seek the other world
irrationally.[^942] Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let
go of it! Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. If I let go of this harmful misconception, people
will say, 'How foolish is the chieftain Pāyāsi, how
incompetent, that he should hold on to a mistake!' I shall carry on with
this view out of anger, contempt, and spite!"[^943]

### 2.11. The Simile of the Two Caravan Leaders

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a large caravan of a thousand wagons traveled from a
country in the east to the west.[^944] Wherever they went they quickly
used up the grass, wood, water, and the green foliage. Now, that caravan
had two leaders, each in charge of five hundred wagons. They thought,
'This is a large caravan of a thousand wagons. Wherever we go we quickly
use up the grass, wood, water, and the green foliage.[^945] Why don't we
split the caravan in two halves?' So that's what they did.

One caravan leader, having prepared much grass, wood, and water, started
the caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he said,[^946] 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. So let's toss out the grass, wood, and
water and restart the caravan with lightly-laden wagons.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and that's what they did.

But in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And all fell to ruin and disaster.
And the men and beasts in that caravan were all devoured by that
non-human spirit.[^947] Only their bones remained.

Now, when the second caravan leader knew that the first caravan was well
underway, he prepared much grass, wood, and water and started the
caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he said, 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. But this person is neither our friend
nor relative. How can we proceed out of trust in him?[^948] We shouldn't
toss out any grass, wood, or water, but continue with our goods laden as
before. We shall not toss out any old stock.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and they restarted the caravan with the
goods laden as before.

And in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And they saw the other caravan that
had come to ruin. And they saw the bones of the men and beasts who had
been devoured by that non-human spirit.

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This caravan came to ruin,
as happens when guided by a foolish caravan leader. Well then, sirs,
toss out any of our merchandise that's of little value, and take what's
valuable from this caravan.'

'Yes, sir' replied the drivers, and that's what they did. They crossed
over the desert safely, as happens when guided by an astute caravan
leader.

In the same way, chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you will come
to ruin seeking the other world irrationally, like the first caravan
leader. And those who think you're worth listening to and trusting will
also come to ruin, like the drivers. Let go of this harmful
misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create lasting harm and
suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

### 2.12. The Simile of the Dung-Carrier

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain swineherd went from his own village to
another village. There he saw a large pile of dry dung abandoned. He
thought, 'This pile of dry dung can serve as food for my pigs. Why don't
I carry it off?' So he spread out his upper robe, shoveled the dry dung
onto it, tied it up into a bundle, lifted it on to his head, and went on
his way. While on his way a large sudden storm poured down. Smeared with
leaking, oozing dung down to his fingernails, he kept on carrying the
load of dung.

When people saw him they said, 'Have you gone mad, sir? Have you lost
your mind? For how can you, smeared with leaking, oozing dung down to
your fingernails, keep on carrying that load of dung?'

'You're the mad ones, sirs! You're the ones who've lost your minds! For
this will serve as food for my pigs.'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the dung carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

### 2.13. The Simile of the Gamblers

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, two gamblers were playing with seed dice. One gambler,
every time they made a bad throw, swallowed the losing seed.[^949]

The second gambler saw him, and said, 'Well, my friend, you've won it
all! Give me the seed dice, I will roll them.'[^950]

'Yes, my friend,' the gambler replied, and gave them.

Then the gambler soaked the seed dice in poison and said to the other,
'Come, my friend, let's play seed dice.'

'Yes, my friend,' the other gambler replied.

And for a second time the gamblers played with seed dice. And for the
second time, every time they made a bad throw, that gambler swallowed
the losing seed.

The second gambler saw him, and said,

> 'The man swallows the dice without realizing\
> they're smeared with burning poison.\
> Swallow, you damn cheat, swallow!\
> Soon you'll know the bitter fruit!'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the gambler in the simile. Let
go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create
lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

### 2.14. The Simile of the Man Who Carried Hemp

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, the inhabitants of a certain country emigrated. Then
one friend said to another, 'Come, my friend, let's go to that country.
Hopefully we'll get some riches there!'

'Yes, my friend,' the other replied.

They went to that country, and to a certain deserted village. There they
saw a pile of abandoned sunn hemp. Seeing it, one friend said to the
other,[^951] 'This is a pile of abandoned sunn hemp. Well then, my
friend, you make up a bundle of hemp, and I'll make one too. Let's both
take a bundle of hemp and go on.'

'Yes, my friend,' he said. Carrying their bundles of hemp they went to
another deserted village.

There they saw much sunn hemp thread abandoned. Seeing it, one friend
said to the other, 'This pile of abandoned sunn hemp thread is just what
we wanted the hemp for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles
of hemp, and both take a bundle of hemp thread and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.'[^952] So one friend
abandoned their bundle of hemp and picked up a bundle of hemp thread.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw much sunn hemp
cloth abandoned. Seeing it, one friend said to the other, 'This pile of
abandoned sunn hemp cloth is just what we wanted the hemp and hemp
thread for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles, and both
take a bundle of hemp cloth and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of hemp thread and picked up a bundle of hemp cloth.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw a pile of flax,
and by turn, linen thread, linen cloth, silk, silk thread, silk cloth,
iron, copper, tin, lead, silver, and gold abandoned. Seeing it, one
friend said to the other, 'This pile of gold is just what we wanted all
those other things for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles,
and both take a bundle of gold and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of silver and picked up a bundle of gold.

Then they returned to their own village. When one friend returned with a
bundle of sunn hemp, they didn't please their parents, their partners
and children, or their friends and colleagues. And they got no pleasure
and happiness on that account. But when the other friend returned with a
bundle of gold, they pleased their parents, their partners and children,
and their friends and colleagues. And they got much pleasure and
happiness on that account.

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the hemp-carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

## 3. Going for Refuge

"I was delighted and satisfied with your very first simile, Mister
Kassapa![^953] Nevertheless, I wanted to hear your various solutions to
the problem, so I thought I'd oppose you in this way. Excellent, Mister
Kassapa! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing
the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in
the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Kassapa
has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister
Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From
this day forth, may Mister Kassapa remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life.

Mister Kassapa, I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please instruct me
so it will be for my lasting welfare and happiness."[^954]

## 4. On Sacrifice

"Chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep,
chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. And
the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or beneficial or
splendid or bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
barren field, that barren ground, with uncleared stumps he sowed seeds
that were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged, infertile, and ill kept. And
the heavens don't provide enough rain when needed. Would those seeds
grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get abundant fruit?"

"No, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
slaughtered. And the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or
beneficial or splendid or bountiful.

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens
and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. And the
recipients have right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.
That kind of sacrifice is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
fertile field, that fertile ground, with well-cleared stumps he sowed
seeds that were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and
well kept. And the heavens provide plenty of rain when needed. Would
those seeds grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get
abundant fruit?"

"Yes, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
not slaughtered. And the recipients have right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. That kind of sacrifice is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful."

## 5. On the Student Uttara

Then the chieftain Pāyāsi set up an offering for ascetics
and brahmins, for paupers, vagrants, supplicants, and beggars. At that
offering such food as rough gruel with pickles was given, and rough
clothes with knotted fringes.[^955] Now, it was a student named Uttara
who organized that offering.

When the offering was over he referred to it like this, "Through this
offering may I be together with the chieftain Pāyāsi in
this world, but not in the next."

Pāyāsi heard of this, so he summoned Uttara and said, "Is
it really true, dear Uttara, that you referred to the offering in this
way?"

"Yes, sir."

"But why? Don't we who seek merit expect some result from the offering?"

"At your offering such food as rough gruel with pickles was given, which
you wouldn't even want to touch with your foot, much less eat. And also
rough clothes with knotted fringes, which you also wouldn't want to
touch with your foot, much less wear. Sir, you're dear and beloved to
me. But how can I reconcile one so dear with something so disagreeable?"

"Well then, dear Uttara, set up an offering with the same kind of food
that I eat, and the same kind of clothes that I wear."

"Yes, sir," replied Uttara, and did so.

So the chieftain Pāyāsi gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
four great kings, in an empty palace of sirisa wood.[^956] But the
student Uttara who organized the offering gave gifts carefully,
thoughtfully, with his own hands, not giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
thirty-three.

## 6. The God Pāyāsi

Now at that time Venerable Gavampati would often go to that empty sirisa
palace for the day's meditation.[^957] Then the god Pāyāsi
went up to him, bowed, and stood to one side. Gavampati said to him,
"Who are you, reverend?"

"Sir, I am the chieftain Pāyāsi."

"Didn't you have the view that there is no afterlife, no beings are
reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds?"

"It's true, sir, I did have such a view. But Master Kassapa the Prince
dissuaded me from that harmful misconception."

"But the student named Uttara who organized that offering for
you---where has he been reborn?"

"Sir, Uttara gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his own hands, not
giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in
company with the gods of the thirty-three. But I gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with my own hands, giving the dregs. When my body
broke up, after death, I was reborn in company with the gods of the four
great kings, in an empty sirisa palace.

So, sir, when you've returned to the human realm, please announce this:
'Give gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with your own hands, not giving the
dregs. The chieftain Pāyāsi gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
four great kings, in an empty palace of sirisa. But the student Uttara
who organized the offering gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his
own hands, not giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he
was reborn in company with the gods of the Thirty-Three.'"

So when Venerable Gavampati returned to the human realm he made that
announcement.
