# DN 25 The Lion's Roar at the Monastery of Lady Udumbarikā  *Udumbarikasutta*

## 1. The Story of the Wanderer Nigrodha

So I have heard.  At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time the wanderer Nigrodha was residing in the lady
Udumbarikā's monastery for wanderers, together with a large
assembly of three thousand wanderers.[^29] Then the householder
Sandhāna left Rājagaha in the middle of the
day to see the Buddha.[^30]

Then it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he's
in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants, as
they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the wanderer Nigrodha at the lady
Udumbarikā's monastery for wanderers?" So he went to the
monastery of the wanderers.

Now at that time, Nigrodha was sitting together with a large assembly of
wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all kinds
of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state
of existence.

Nigrodha saw Sandhāna coming off in the distance, and
hushed his own assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The
householder Sandhāna, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is
coming. He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the
ascetic Gotama, who is residing near Rājagaha. Such
venerables like the quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the
quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to
approach." Then those wanderers fell silent.

Then Sandhāna went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Nigrodha, "The way the
wanderers make an uproar as they sit together and talk about all kinds
of low topics is one thing. It's quite different to the way the Buddha
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest that are
quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human
settlements, and fit for retreat."

When Sandhāna said this, Nigrodha said to him, "Surely,
householder, you should know better! With whom does the ascetic Gotama
converse? With whom does he engage in discussion? With whom does he
achieve lucidity of wisdom? Staying in empty huts has destroyed the
ascetic Gotama's wisdom. Not frequenting assemblies, he is unable to
hold a discussion. He just lurks on the periphery. He's just like a
one-eyed cow, circling around and lurking on the periphery.[^31] Go on,
householder! Were the ascetic Gotama to come to this assembly, I'd sink
him with just one question! I'd tie him up like a hollow pot!"[^32]

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
this discussion between the householder Sandhāna and the
wanderer Nigrodha. Then the Buddha descended from Vulture's Peak
Mountain and went to the peacocks' feeding ground on the bank of the
Sumāgadhā, where he walked mindfully in the open air.

Nigrodha saw him, and hushed his own assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs,
don't make a sound. The ascetic Gotama is walking mindfully on the bank
of the Sumāgadhā. The venerable likes quiet and praises
quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to
approach. If he comes, I'll ask him this question: 'Sir, what teaching
do you use to guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in
the fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?'" Then those wanderers
fell silent.

## 2. Mortification in Disgust of Sin

Then the Buddha went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, who said to him, "Let
the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been a
long time since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit
down, this seat is ready." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while
Nigrodha took a low seat and sat to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Nigrodha, what were you sitting talking about just now? What
conversation was left unfinished?"[^33]

Nigrodha said, "Well, sir, I saw you walking mindfully and said: 'If the
ascetic Gotama comes, I'll ask him this question: "Sir, what teaching do
you use to guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?"' This is the conversation
that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"It's hard for you to understand this, Nigrodha, since you have a
different view, creed, and belief, unless you dedicate yourself to
practice with the guidance of tradition. Please ask me a question about
the higher disgust of sin in your own tradition:[^34] 'How are the
conditions for the fervent mortification in disgust of sin completed,
and how are they incomplete?'"[^35]

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "Oh, how incredible,
how amazing! The ascetic Gotama has such power and might! For he sets
aside his own doctrine and invites discussion on the doctrine of
others!"

Then Nigrodha, having quieted those wanderers, said to the Buddha, "Sir,
we teach fervent mortification in disgust of sin, regarding it as
essential and sticking to it. How are the conditions for the fervent
mortification in disgust of sin completed, and how are they incomplete?"

"Nigrodha, it's when a mortifier goes naked, ignoring conventions. They
lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent
to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an
invitation for a meal.[^36] They don't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breast-feeding, or who lives with a man; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. They go to just one house
for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up
to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They make their bed on a plank, or the bare ground. They lie only on one
side. They wear dust and dirt. They stay in the open air. They sleep
wherever they lay their mat. They eat unnatural things, committed to the
practice of eating unnatural foods. They don't drink, committed to the
practice of not drinking liquids. They're devoted to ritual bathing
three times a day, including the evening.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin complete, or incomplete?"

"Clearly, sir, if that is so the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
is complete, not incomplete."

"But even such a completed mortification has many defects, I say."

### 2.1. Defects

"But how does the Buddha say that even such a completed mortification
has many defects?"

"Firstly, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They're
happy with that, as they've got all they wished for.[^37] This is a
defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too is a
defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account of
that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for. This too is
a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too
is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account
of that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier becomes fussy about food, saying, 'This is
acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not acceptable
they give up in expectation.[^38] But what is acceptable they eat tied,
infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the
escape. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification out of
longing for possessions, honor, and popularity, thinking, 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier rebukes a certain ascetic or brahmin, 'But what
is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this ascetic's
doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or
joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is crunched together
like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' This too is a defect in that
mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. They
think, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored, respected,
esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent mortifier
who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated
among good families.' Thus they give rise to jealousy and stinginess
regarding families. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sits meditation only when people can see them.
This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sneaks about among families, thinking,[^39]
'This is part of my mortification; this is part of my mortification.'
This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sometimes behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it is, even
though it isn't. Or they say it isn't, even though it is. Thus they tell
a deliberate lie. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier disagrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma, even when they make a valid point. This
too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier is irritable and acrimonious ... offensive and
contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they have corrupt wishes, falling under the
sway of corrupt wishes ... they have wrong view, being attached to an
extremist view ... they're attached to their own views, holding them
tight, and refusing to let go.[^40] This too is a defect in that
mortifier.

What do you think, Nigrodha? Are such mortifications defective or not?"

"Clearly, sir, they're defective. It's possible that a mortifier might
have all of these defects, let alone one or other of them."

### 2.2. On Reaching the Shoots

"Firstly, Nigrodha, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification.
But they're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they
wished for. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
don't glorify themselves or put others down on account of that. So
they're pure on that point.

They don't become indulgent ...

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they wished
for ...

They don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of
possessions, honor, and popularity ...

They don't become indulgent because of it ... So they're pure on that
point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't become fussy about food, saying, 'This
is acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not
acceptable they give up without expectation. But what is acceptable they
eat without being tied, infatuated, attached, seeing the drawbacks, and
understanding the escape. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't undertake a practice of mortification
out of longing for possessions, honor, and popularity ... 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't rebuke a certain ascetic or brahmin,
'But what is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this
ascetic's doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems,
cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is
crunched together like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' So they're pure
on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. It
never occurs to them, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored,
respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent
mortifier who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and
venerated among good families.' Thus they don't give rise to jealousy
and stinginess regarding families. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sit meditation only when people can see
them. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sneak about among families, thinking,
'This is part of my mortification; this is part of my mortification.' So
they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier never behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it isn't when it
isn't. Or they say it is when it is. Thus they don't tell a deliberate
lie. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier agrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma when they make a valid point. So they're
pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier is not irritable and acrimonious ... offensive
and contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they don't have corrupt wishes ... and wrong
view ... they're not attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go. So they're pure on that point.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the shoots."

### 2.3. On Reaching the Bark

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint.[^41] And how is a mortifier restrained in the fourfold
constraint? It's when a mortifier doesn't kill living creatures, doesn't
get others to kill, and doesn't approve of killing.[^42] They don't
steal, get others to steal, or approve of stealing. They don't lie, get
others to lie, or approve of lying. They don't expect rewards from their
practice, they don't lead others to expect rewards, and they don't
approve of expecting rewards.[^43] That's how a mortifier is restrained
in the fourfold constraint.

When a mortifier is restrained in the fourfold constraint, that is their
mortification. They step forward, not falling back. They frequent a
secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a
mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw. After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with
a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving
up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will,
full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will.
Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of
dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing
the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse,
they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside,
cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they
meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful
qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion ... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...
They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the bark."

### 2.4. On Reaching the Softwood

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the softwood."

## 3. On Reaching the Heartwood

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... equanimity ... They recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin has
reached the peak and the pith. Nigrodha, remember you said this to me:
'Sir, what teaching do you use to guide your disciples, through which
they claim solace in the fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?'
Well, there is something better and finer than this. That's what I use
to guide my disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life."

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "In that case, we're
lost, and so is our tradition! We don't know anything better or finer
than that!"

## 4. Nigrodha Feels Depressed

Then the householder Sandhāna realized, "Obviously, now
these wanderers want to listen to what the Buddha says. They're actively
listening and trying to understand!"

So he said to the wanderer Nigrodha, "Honorable Nigrodha, remember you
said this to me: 'Surely, householder, you should know better! With whom
does the ascetic Gotama converse? With whom does he engage in
discussion? With whom does he achieve lucidity of wisdom? Staying in
empty huts has destroyed the ascetic Gotama's wisdom. Not frequenting
assemblies, he is unable to hold a discussion. He just lurks on the
periphery. He's just like a one-eyed cow, circling around and lurking on
the periphery. Please, householder, let the ascetic Gotama come to this
assembly. I'll sink him with just one question! I'll roll him over and
wrap him up like a hollow pot!' Now the Blessed One, perfected and fully
awakened, has arrived here. Why don't you send him out of the assembly
to the periphery like a one-eyed cow? Why don't you sink him with just
one question? Why don't you roll him over and wrap him up like a hollow
pot?" When he said this, Nigrodha sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Is it really true, Nigrodha---are
those your words?"

"It's true, sir, those are my words. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me."

"What do you think, Nigrodha? Have you heard that wanderers of the past
who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said that when the
perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the past came together,
they made an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all
kinds of low topics, like you do in your tradition these days? Or did
they say that the Buddhas frequented remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the madding crowd,
remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat, like I do these
days?"

"I have heard that wanderers of the past who were elderly and senior,
said that when the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the
past came together, they didn't make an uproar, like I do in my
tradition these days. They said that the Buddhas of the past frequented
remote lodgings in the wilderness, like the Buddha does these days."

"Nigrodha, you are a sensible and mature man. Did it not occur to you:
'The Blessed One is awakened, tamed, serene, crossed over, and quenched.
And he teaches Dhamma for awakening, taming, serenity, crossing over,
and extinguishment'?"

## 5. The Culmination of the Spiritual Path

Nigrodha said, "I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me to speak in that way. Please, sir, accept my mistake
for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Nigrodha, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to speak in that way. But since you have recognized
your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept
it. For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a
mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint
in the future. Nigrodha, this is what I say:

Let a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven years. They will live having achieved with their own insight the
goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Let alone seven years. Let a sensible person
come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and
instruct them. By practicing as instructed they will realize the supreme
end of the spiritual path in this very life, in six years ... five years
... four years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven
months ... six months ... five months ... four months ... three months
... two months ... one month ... a fortnight. Let alone a fortnight. Let
a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven days.

## 6. The Wanderers Feel Depressed

Nigrodha, you might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because
he wants pupils.' But you should not see it like this. Let your tutor
remain your tutor.[^44]

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our recitation.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your recitation remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our livelihood.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your livelihood remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to start doing things that are unskillful and considered unskillful
in our tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things
that are unskillful and considered unskillful in your tradition remain
as they are.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to stop doing things that are skillful and considered skillful in our
tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things that
are skillful and considered skillful in your tradition remain as they
are.

I do not speak for any of these reasons. Nigrodha, there are things that
are unskillful, corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting
in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. I teach Dhamma so
that those things may be given up. When you practice accordingly,
corrupting qualities will be given up in you and cleansing qualities
will grow. You'll enter and remain in the fullness and abundance of
wisdom, having realized it with your own insight in this very life."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, as if their minds
were possessed by Māra. Then the Buddha thought,[^45] "All
these silly people have been touched by the Wicked One! For not even a
single one thinks, 'Come, let us lead the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama for the sake of enlightenment---for what do seven days
matter?'"

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar in the lady
Udumbarikā's monastery for wanderers, rose into the air and
landed on Vulture's Peak. Meanwhile, the householder
Sandhāna went right back to Rājagaha.

