# DN 28 Inspiring Confidence  *Sampasādanīyasutta*

## 1. Sāriputta's Lion's Roar

So I have heard.  At one time the Buddha was staying near
Nāḷandā in Pāvārika's mango grove.[^160] Then
Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have such confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no
other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, Sāriputta. You've
roared a definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such
confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or
brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is
superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, Sāriputta, given that you don't comprehend the
minds of Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing,
making such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the teaching. Suppose
there were a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known
people in. As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn't see a hole or
cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip out. They'd
think, 'Whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of
them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'

Sir, once I approached the Buddha to listen to the teaching.[^161] He
explained Dhamma with its higher and higher stages, with its better and
better stages, with its dark and bright sides. When I directly knew a
certain principle of those teachings, in accordance with how I was
taught, I came to a conclusion about the teachings. I had confidence in
the Teacher:[^162] 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The Saṅgha is practicing well.'

### 1.1. Teaching Skillful Qualities

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches skillful qualities is
unsurpassable. This consists of such skillful qualities as the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases
of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.[^163] By these a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. This is unsurpassable when it
comes to skillful qualities. The Buddha understands this without
exception. There is nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another
ascetic or brahmin might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha
when it comes to skillful qualities.

### 1.2. Describing the Sense Fields

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of the sense
fields is unsurpassable. There are these six interior and exterior sense
fields.[^164] The eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and
smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the mind and
ideas. This is unsurpassable when it comes to describing the sense
fields. The Buddha understands this without exception. There is nothing
to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or brahmin might be
superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it comes to describing
the sense fields.

### 1.3. The Conception of the Embryo

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the conception of the embryo
is unsurpassable. There are these four kinds of conception.

Firstly, someone is unaware when conceived in their mother's womb,
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
first kind of conception.[^165]

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb, but
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
second kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, and aware as they emerge. This is the fourth
kind of conception.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the conception of the embryo.

### 1.4. Ways of Revealing

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different ways of
revealing is unsurpassable. There are these four ways of
revealing.[^166]

Firstly, someone reveals by means of a sign, 'This is what you're
thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And
even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not
otherwise. This is the first way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or non-humans
or deities, 'This is what you're thinking, such is your thought, and
thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this many times, it
turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the second way of
revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought spreading
as someone thinks and considers, 'This is what you're thinking, such is
your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal
this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the
third way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone comprehends the mind of a person who has attained
the immersion that's free of placing the mind and keeping it connected.
They understand, 'Judging by the way this person's intentions are
directed, immediately after this mind state, they'll think this
thought.' And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly
so, not otherwise. This is the fourth way of revealing.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of revealing.

### 1.5. Attainments of Vision

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the attainments of vision is
unsurpassable. There are these four attainments of vision.

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they examine their own body
up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs,
wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.[^167] 'In this body
there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones,
bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs,
intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood,
sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' This is
the first attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood.[^168] This is the second attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. And they understand of a person that their stream of
consciousness is consistent on both sides: established in both this
world and the next.[^169] This is the third attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. They understand of a person that their stream of consciousness is
consistent on both sides: not established in either this world or the
next. This is the fourth attainment of vision.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to attainments of vision.

### 1.6. Descriptions of Persons

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of persons is
unsurpassable. There are these seven persons. One freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, a follower by faith.[^170] This is
unsurpassable when it comes to the description of persons.

### 1.7. Kinds of Striving

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the kinds of striving is
unsurpassable. There are these seven awakening factors: the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.[^171] This is unsurpassable when
it comes to the kinds of striving.

### 1.8. Ways of Practice

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the ways of practice is
unsurpassable.[^172]

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

Of these, the painful practice with slow insight is said to be inferior
both ways: because it's painful and because it's slow. The painful
practice with swift insight is said to be inferior because it's painful.
The pleasant practice with slow insight is said to be inferior because
it's slow. But the pleasant practice with swift insight is said to be
superior both ways: because it's pleasant and because it's swift.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of practice.

### 1.9. Behavior in Speech

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches behavior in speech is
unsurpassable. It's when someone doesn't use speech that's connected
with lying, or divisive, or backbiting, or aggressively trying to
win.[^173] They speak only wise counsel, valuable and timely. This is
unsurpassable when it comes to behavior in speech.

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches a person's ethical behavior is
unsurpassable.[^174] It's when someone is honest and faithful. They
don't use deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't use
material things to chase after other material things. They guard the
sense doors and eat in moderation. They're fair, dedicated to
wakefulness, tireless, energetic, and meditative. They have good memory,
eloquence, range, retention, and thoughtfulness. They're not greedy for
sensual pleasures. They are mindful and alert.[^175] This is
unsurpassable when it comes to a person's ethical behavior.

### 1.10. Responsiveness to Instruction

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction is unsurpassable. There are these four
degrees of responsiveness to instruction.[^176]

The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual:[^177] 'By practicing as instructed this individual will,
with the ending of three fetters, become a stream-enterer, not liable to
be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'By practicing as
instructed this individual will, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, become a once-returner. They
will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.'
The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another individual:
'By practicing as instructed this individual will, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, be reborn spontaneously. They will be
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.' The
Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'By
practicing as instructed this individual will realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.'

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction.

### 1.11. The Knowledge and Freedom of Others

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge and freedom of
other individuals is unsurpassable.[^178] The Buddha knows by rationally
applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of three
fetters this individual will become a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of
three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, this
individual will become a once-returner. They will come back to this
world once only, then make an end of suffering.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of
the five lower fetters, this individual will be reborn spontaneously.
They will be extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world.' The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual: 'This individual will realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.' This is
unsurpassable when it comes to the knowledge and freedom of other
individuals.

### 1.12. Eternalism

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches eternalist doctrines is
unsurpassable. There are these three eternalist doctrines.[^179]

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect many hundreds
of thousands of past lives, with features and details. They say, 'I know
that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know whether
in the future the cosmos will expand or contract.[^180] The self and the
cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the first eternalist doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as ten eons of the expansion and
contraction of the cosmos,[^181] with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the second eternalist doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as forty eons of the expansion
and contraction of the cosmos, with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the third eternalist doctrine.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to eternalist doctrines.

### 1.13. Recollecting Past Lives

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of recollecting
past lives is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint
of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application
of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details. Sir, there are gods
whose lifespan cannot be reckoned or calculated. Still, no matter what
incarnation they have previously been reborn in---whether formed or
formless or percipient or non-percipient or neither percipient nor
non-percipient---they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. This is unsurpassable when it comes to the
knowledge of recollecting past lives.

### 1.14. Death and Rebirth

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of the death and
rebirth of sentient beings is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or
brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and
right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn--- inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is unsurpassable when
it comes to the knowledge of death and rebirth.

### 1.15. Psychic Powers

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches psychic power is
unsurpassable. There are these two kinds of psychic power. There are
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble.[^182] And there are psychic powers that are free
of defilements and attachments, and are said to be noble. What are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble? It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of
keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. These are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble.

But what are the psychic powers that are free of defilements and
attachments, and are said to be noble? It's when, if a mendicant wishes:
'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's
what they do.[^183] If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I
meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do. These are the psychic powers that are free of defilements
and attachments, and are said to be noble. This is unsurpassable when it
comes to psychic powers. The Buddha understands this without exception.
There is nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or
brahmin might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it
comes to psychic powers.

### 1.16. The Four Absorptions

The Buddha has achieved what should be achieved by a faithful gentleman
by being energetic and strong, by human strength, energy, vigor, and
exertion. The Buddha doesn't indulge in sensual pleasures, which are
low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And he doesn't indulge in
self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and pointless.[^184] He
gets the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when he wants, without trouble or
difficulty.[^185]

### 1.17. On Being Questioned

Sir, if they were to ask me, 'Reverend Sāriputta, is there
any other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?'
I would tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'Reverend Sāriputta, is there
any other ascetic or brahmin---whether past or future---whose direct
knowledge is equal to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?' I would
tell them 'Yes.' But if they were to ask: 'Reverend
Sāriputta, is there any other ascetic or brahmin at present
whose direct knowledge is equal to the Buddha when it comes to
awakening?' I would tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'But why does Venerable
Sāriputta grant this in respect of some but not others?' I
would answer them like this,[^186] 'Reverends, I have heard and learned
this in the presence of the Buddha: "The perfected ones, fully awakened
Buddhas of the past were equal in awakening to myself."[^187] And I have
heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: "The perfected
ones, fully awakened Buddhas of the future will be equal in awakening to
myself." And I have also heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: "It's impossible for two perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas
to arise in the same solar system at the same time."'[^188]

Answering this way, I trust that I repeated what the Buddha has said,
and didn't misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my explanation was
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, Sāriputta, in answering this way you repeat what
I've said, and don't misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation
is in line with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

## 2. Incredible and Amazing

When he had spoken, Venerable Udāyī said to the
Buddha,[^189] "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has
so few wishes, such contentment, such self-effacement! For even though
the Realized One has such power and might, he will not make a display of
himself. If the wanderers following other religions were to see even a
single one of these qualities in themselves they'd carry around a banner
to that effect. It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has
so few wishes, such contentment, such self-effacement! For even though
the Realized One has such power and might, he will not make a display of
himself."

"See, Udāyī, how the Realized One has so few wishes, such
contentment, such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One has
such power and might, he will not make a display of himself. If the
wanderers following other religions were to see even a single one of
these qualities in themselves they'd carry around a banner to that
effect. See, Udāyī, how the Realized One has so few wishes,
such contentment, such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One
has such power and might, he will not make a display of himself."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta, "So
Sāriputta, you should frequently speak this exposition of
the teaching to the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Though there will
be some silly people who have doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Realized One, when they hear this exposition of the teaching they'll
give up that doubt or uncertainty."

That's how Venerable Sāriputta declared his confidence in
the Buddha's presence. And that's why the name of this discussion is
"Inspiring Confidence".

