# Linked Discourses on the Eightfold Path

## The Chapter on Ignorance

### N 45.1 Ignorance *Avijjāsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities,
with lack of conscience and prudence following along. An ignoramus, sunk
in ignorance, gives rise to wrong view. Wrong view gives rise to wrong
thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. Wrong speech gives
rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. Wrong
livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong effort gives rise to wrong
mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion.

Knowledge precedes the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience
and prudence following along. A sage, firm in knowledge, gives rise to
right view. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives
rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right
action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to
right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right
mindfulness gives rise to right immersion."

### N 45.2 Half the Spiritual Life *Upaḍḍhasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Townsville. Then
Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are half the spiritual
life."

"Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda! Good friends, companions, and
associates are the whole of the spiritual life. A mendicant with good
friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, which
relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting
go. They develop right thought ... right speech ... right action ...
right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ... right
immersion, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripens as letting go. That's how a mendicant with good friends develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

And here's another way to understand how good friends are the whole of
the spiritual life. For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient
beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these
things. This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole
of the spiritual life."

### N 45.3 Sāriputta *Sāriputtasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, good friends, companions, and associates are the whole of the
spiritual life."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! Good friends, companions, and
associates are the whole of the spiritual life. A mendicant with good
friends, companions, and associates can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path. And how does a mendicant with good friends
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path?

It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

And here's another way to understand how good friends are the whole of
the spiritual life. For, by relying on me as a good friend, sentient
beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all these
things. This is another way to understand how good friends are the whole
of the spiritual life."

### N 45.4 Regarding the Brahmin Jānussoṇi *Jāṇussoṇibrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms. He saw the brahmin
Jānussoṇi driving out of Sāvatthī in a
splendid all-white chariot drawn by mares. The yoked horses were pure
white, as were the ornaments, chariot, upholstery, reins, goad, and
canopy. And his turban, robes, sandals were white, as was the chowry
fanning him.

When people saw it they exclaimed, "Wow! That's a divine vehicle! It's a
vehicle fit for divinity!"

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal,
on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened, adding, "Sir, can you point
out a divine vehicle in this teaching and training?"

"I can, Ānanda," said the Buddha.

"These are all terms for the noble eightfold path: 'divine vehicle, or
else 'vehicle of truth', or else 'supreme victory in battle'.

When right view is developed and cultivated it culminates with the
removal of greed, hate, and delusion. When right thought ... right
speech ... right action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right
mindfulness ... right immersion is developed and cultivated it
culminates with the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is a way to understand how these are all terms for the noble
eightfold path: 'vehicle of divine', or else 'vehicle of truth', or else
'supreme victory in battle'."

That is what the Buddha said.

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

> "Its qualities of faith and wisdom\
> are always yoked to the shaft.\
> Conscience is its pole, mind its strap,\
> and mindfulness its careful driver.
>
> The chariot's equipped with ethics,\
> its axle is absorption, and energy its wheel.\
> Equanimity and immersion are the carriage-shaft,\
> and it's upholstered with desirelessness.
>
> Good will, harmlessness, and seclusion\
> are its weapons,\
> patience its shield and armor,\
> as it rolls on to sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> This supreme divine vehicle\
> arises in oneself.\
> The attentive leave the world in it,\
> sure of winning the victory."

### N 45.5 What's the Purpose *Kimatthiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, sometimes wanderers of other religions ask us: 'Reverends, what's
the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?' We
answer them like this: 'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under
the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.'

Answering this way, we trust that we repeat what the Buddha has said,
and don't misrepresent him with an untruth. We trust our explanation is
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I've said, and don't
misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the
teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.
For the purpose of leading the spiritual life under me is to completely
understand suffering.

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for completely understanding that suffering?' You should answer
them like this: 'There is.'

And what is that path? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path
and the practice for completely understanding suffering. When questioned
by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer them."

### N 45.6 A Mendicant (1st) *Paṭhamaaññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is the spiritual
path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Mendicant, the spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that
is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. The
ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

### N 45.7 A Mendicant (2nd) *Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'the removal of greed, hate, and delusion'. What is
this a term for?"

"Mendicant, the removal of greed, hate, and delusion is a term for the
element of extinguishment. It's used to speak of the ending of
defilements."

When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'freedom from death'. What is freedom from death?
And what is the path that leads to freedom from death?"

"The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is called freedom from
death. The path that leads to freedom from death is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion."

### N 45.8 Analysis *Vibhaṅgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach and analyze for you the noble eightfold path.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the noble eightfold path? It is right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering. This is called right view.

And what is right thought? It is the thought of renunciation, good will,
and harmlessness. This is called right thought.

And what is right speech? Avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing,
and sexual activity. This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called right
livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have
not arisen do arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development. This is called right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is called right mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion."

### N 45.9 A Spike *Sūkasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it is impossible for it to
break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is
pointing the wrong way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the wrong way cannot break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
wrong way.

Suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right way. If you
trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the skin and
produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the right way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way may well break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
right way.

And how does a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way break ignorance, give rise to knowledge, and
realize extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way breaks
ignorance, gives rise to knowledge, and realizes extinguishment."

### N 45.10 With Nandiya *Nandiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Nandiya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, how many things, when developed and cultivated, have
extinguishment as their culmination, destination, and end?"

"These eight things, when developed and cultivated, have extinguishment
as their culmination, destination, and end. What eight? They are: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things, when
developed and cultivated, have extinguishment as their culmination,
destination, and end."

When he said this, the wanderer Nandiya said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
worthy Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

## The Chapter on Meditation

### N 45.11 Meditation (1st) *Paṭhamavihārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for a fortnight. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I've been practicing part of the meditation I practiced
when I was first awakened. I understand that there's feeling conditioned
by wrong view and feeling conditioned by right view. ... There's feeling
conditioned by wrong immersion, and feeling conditioned by right
immersion.

There's feeling conditioned by desire, by thought, and by perception. As
long as desire, thought, and perception are not stilled, there is
feeling conditioned by that. When desire, thought, and perception are
stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been
attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that."

### N 45.12 Meditation (2nd) *Dutiyavihārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, I've been practicing part of the meditation I practiced
when I was first awakened.

I understand that there's feeling conditioned by wrong view and by the
stilling of wrong view, by right view and by the stilling of right view.
... There's feeling conditioned by wrong immersion and by the stilling
of wrong immersion, by right immersion and by the stilling of right
immersion.

There's feeling conditioned by desire and by the stilling of desire, by
thought and by the stilling of thought, by perception and by the
stilling of perception. As long as desire, thought, and perception are
not stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that. When desire, thought,
and perception are stilled, there is feeling conditioned by that.

There is effort to attain the unattained. When that state has been
attained, there is also feeling conditioned by that."

### N 45.13 A Trainee *Sekkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of this person called 'a trainee'. How is a trainee defined?"

"Mendicant, it's someone who has a trainee's right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. That's how a trainee is defined."

### N 45.14 Arising (1st) *Paṭhamauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be developed and
cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha has appeared. What eight? They are: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things don't arise to be
developed and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha has appeared."

### N 45.15 Arising (2nd) *Dutiyauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be developed and
cultivated apart from the Holy One's training. What eight? They are:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These are the
eight things that don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart from
the Holy One's training."

### N 45.16 Purified (1st) *Paṭhamaparisuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions except when a Realized One, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha has appeared. What eight? They are: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. These eight things don't
arise to be purified, bright, flawless, and rid of corruptions except
when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
appeared."

### N 45.17 Purified (2nd) *Dutiyaparisuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions apart from the Holy One's training.
What eight? They are: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion. These eight things don't arise to be purified, bright,
flawless, and rid of corruptions apart from the Holy One's training."

### N 45.18 At the Chicken Monastery (1st) *Paṭhamakukkuṭārāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the venerables Ānanda and
Bhadda were staying near Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken
Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called 'not the spiritual path'.
What is not the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'They speak of this
thing called "not the spiritual path". What is not the spiritual path?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"What is not the spiritual path is simply the wrong eightfold path, that
is: wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion."

### N 45.19 At the Chicken Monastery (2nd) *Dutiyakukkuṭārāmasutta*

At Pāṭaliputta.

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is
the spiritual path? And what is the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'They speak of this
thing called "the spiritual path". What is the spiritual path? And what
is the culmination of the spiritual path?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"The spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

The ending of greed, hate, and delusion: this is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

### N 45.20 At the Chicken Monastery (3rd) *Tatiyakukkuṭārāmasutta*

At Pāṭaliputta.

"Reverend, they speak of this thing called the 'spiritual path'. What is
the spiritual path? Who is someone on the spiritual path? And what is
the culmination of the spiritual path?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. ...

The spiritual path is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

Someone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called someone on the
spiritual path.

The ending of greed, hate, and delusion: this is the culmination of the
spiritual path."

## The Chapter on the Wrong Way

### N 45.21 The Wrong Way *Micchattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong way and the right way. Listen
...

And what is the wrong way? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong way.

And what is the right way? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right way."

### N 45.22 Unskillful Qualities *Akusaladhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you skillful and unskillful qualities. Listen
...

And what are unskillful qualities? They are wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, and wrong immersion. These are called unskillful qualities.

And what are skillful qualities? They are right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These are called skillful qualities."

### N 45.23 Practice (1st) *Paṭhamapaṭipadāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice.
Listen ...

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice.

And what's the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right practice."

### N 45.24 Practice (2nd) *Dutiyapaṭipadāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I don't praise wrong practice for laypeople or renunciates.
Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in
the system of the skillful teaching.

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice. I don't praise
wrong practice for lay people or renunciates. Because of wrong practice,
neither laypeople nor renunciates succeed in the system of the skillful
teaching.

I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates. Because of right
practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the system of the
skillful teaching. And what's the right practice? It is right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the right
practice. I praise right practice for laypeople and renunciates.

Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in the
system of the skillful teaching."

### N 45.25 An Untrue Person (1st) *Paṭhamaasappurisasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and a true person. Listen
...

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called an untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called a true person."

### N 45.26 An Untrue Person (2nd) *Dutiyaasappurisasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you an untrue person and an even more untrue
person, a true person and an even truer person. Listen ...

And what is an untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called an untrue person.

And what is an even more untrue person? It's someone who has wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called an even more untrue person.

And what is a true person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called a true person.

And what is an even truer person? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is called an even truer person."

### N 45.27 Pots *Kumbhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it's
hard to overturn. In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to
overturn, but if it has a stand it's hard to overturn.

And what's the stand for the mind? It is simply this noble eightfold
path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.
This is the stand for the mind.

A pot without a stand is easy to overturn, but if it has a stand it's
hard to overturn. In the same way, a mind without a stand is easy to
overturn, but if it has a stand it's hard to overturn."

### N 45.28 Immersion *Samādhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you noble right immersion with its vital
conditions and its prerequisites. Listen ...

And what is noble right immersion with its vital conditions and its
prerequisites? There are right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness.

Unification of mind with these seven factors as prerequisites is called
noble right immersion 'with its vital conditions' and 'with its
prerequisites'."

### N 45.29 Feeling *Vedanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings. What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
these three feelings. What is the noble eightfold path? It is right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
these three feelings."

### N 45.30 With Uttiya *Uttiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Uttiya went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Just
now, sir, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind. 'The
Buddha has spoken of the five kinds of sensual stimulation. What are
they?'"

"Good, good, Uttiya! I have spoken of these five kinds of sensual
stimulation. What five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by
the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ...
Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual
stimulation that I've spoken of.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to give up these five kinds
of sensual stimulation. What is the noble eightfold path? It is right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the noble
eightfold path that should be developed to give up these five kinds of
sensual stimulation."

## The Chapter on Practice

### N 45.31 Practice (1st) *Paṭhamapaṭipattisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the wrong practice and the right practice.
Listen ...

And what's the wrong practice? It is wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. This is called the wrong practice.

And what's the right practice? It is right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion. This is called the right practice."

### N 45.32 Practice (2nd) *Dutiyapaṭipattisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you one practicing wrongly and one practicing
rightly. Listen ...

And who is practicing wrongly? It's someone who has wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. This is called one practicing
wrongly.

And who is practicing rightly? It's someone who has right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called one practicing
rightly."

### N 45.33 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble
path to the complete ending of suffering.

And what is the noble eightfold path? It is right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

Whoever has missed out on the noble eightfold path has missed out on the
noble path to the complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken
the noble eightfold path has undertaken the noble path to the complete
ending of suffering."

### N 45.34 Going to the Far Shore *Pāraṅgamasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when these eight things are developed and cultivated they
lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What eight? They are
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. When these eight
things are developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near
shore to the far shore."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's dominion so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

### N 45.35 The Ascetic Life (1st) *Paṭhamasāmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the ascetic life and the fruits of the
ascetic life. Listen ...

And what is the ascetic life? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the ascetic life.

And what are the fruits of the ascetic life? The fruits of stream-entry,
once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called the fruits of
the ascetic life."

### N 45.36 The Ascetic Life (2nd) *Dutiyasāmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the ascetic life and the goal of the
ascetic life. Listen ...

And what is the ascetic life? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the ascetic life.

And what is the goal of the ascetic life? The ending of greed, hate, and
delusion. This is called the goal of the ascetic life."

### N 45.37 The Brahmin Life (1st) *Paṭhamabrahmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you life as a brahmin and the fruits of life
as a brahmin. Listen ...

And what is life as a brahmin? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called life as a brahmin.

And what are the fruits of life as a brahmin? The fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called
the fruits of life as a brahmin."

### N 45.38 The Brahmin Life (2nd) *Dutiyabrahmaññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you life as a brahmin and the goal of life as
a brahmin. Listen ...

And what is life as a brahmin? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called life as a brahmin.

And what is the goal of life as a brahmin? The ending of greed, hate,
and delusion. This is called the goal of life as a brahmin."

### N 45.39 The Spiritual Path (1st) *Paṭhamabrahmacariyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the spiritual path and the fruits of the
spiritual path. Listen ...

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the spiritual path.

And what are the fruits of the spiritual path? The fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. These are called
the fruits of the spiritual path."

### N 45.40 The Spiritual Path (2nd) *Dutiyabrahmacariyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the spiritual path and the goal of the
spiritual path. Listen ...

And what is the spiritual path? It is simply this noble eightfold path,
that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This
is called the spiritual path.

And what is the goal of the spiritual path? The ending of greed, hate,
and delusion. This is called the goal of the spiritual path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Followers of Other Paths

### N 45.41 The Fading Away of Greed *Rāgavirāgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this: 'The purpose of
leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is the fading away of
greed.'

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for the fading away of greed?' You should answer them like
this: 'There is a path and a practice for the fading away of greed.'

And what is that path, what is that practice for the fading away of
greed? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice for the fading away of greed.

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should
answer them."

### N 45.42--47 Six Discourses on Giving Up Fetters, Etc. *Saṁyojanappahānādisuttachakka*

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this:

'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to give
up the fetters.' ...

'... to uproot the underlying tendencies.' ...

'... to completely understand the course of time.' ...

'... to end the defilements.' ...

'... to realize the fruit of knowledge and freedom.' ...

'... for knowledge and vision.' ..."

### N 45.48 Extinguishment by Not Grasping *Anupādāparinibbānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?' You should answer them like this: 'The purpose of
leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is extinguishment by not
grasping.'

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Is there a path and a
practice for extinguishment by not grasping?' You should answer them
like this: 'There is a path and a practice for extinguishment by not
grasping.'

And what is that path, what is that practice for extinguishment by not
grasping? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice for extinguishment by not grasping.

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should
answer them."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Sun

### N 45.49 Good Friends (1st) *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way good friendship is the forerunner and precursor of the
noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.50--54 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (1st) *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in ethics is the forerunner and precursor of
the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant accomplished in
ethics can expect ..." ...

"... accomplished in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplished in self-development ..."

"... accomplished in view ..."

"... accomplished in diligence ..."

### N 45.55 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (1st) *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in rational application of mind is the
forerunner and precursor of the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.56 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way good friendship is the forerunner and precursor of the
noble eightfold path for a mendicant. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.57--61 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (2nd) *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way accomplishment in ethics is the forerunner and precursor of
the noble eightfold path for a mendicant. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.62 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on One Thing

### N 45.63 Good Friends (1st) *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's good friendship. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.64--68 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (1st) *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.69 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (1st) *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.70 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's good friendship. A mendicant with good friends can
expect to develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.71--75 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. (2nd) *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, one thing helps give rise to the noble eightfold path. What
one thing? It's accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.76 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on One Thing

### N 45.77 Good Friends *Kalyāṇamittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like good
friendship. A mendicant with good friends can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.78--82 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. *Sīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like
accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.83 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind *Yonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.84 Good Friends (2nd) *Dutiyakalyāṇamittasutta*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like good
friendship. A mendicant with good friends can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant with good friends
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.85--89 Five Discourses on Accomplishment in Ethics, Etc. *Dutiyasīlasampadādisuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the noble
eightfold path, or, if it's already arisen, fully develops it like
accomplishment in ethics. ..."

"... accomplishment in enthusiasm ..."

"... accomplishment in self-development ..."

"... accomplishment in view ..."

"... accomplishment in diligence ..."

### N 45.90 Accomplishment in Rational Application of Mind (2nd) *Dutiyayonisomanasikārasampadāsutta*

"... accomplishment in rational application of mind. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind
develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a
mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 45.91 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.92--95 Four Discourses on Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasuttacatukka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

### N 45.96 Sixth Discourse on Slanting East *Chaṭṭhapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, all the great rivers---that is, the Ganges,
Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---slant, slope, and incline towards the east. In the
same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold
path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.97 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. ..."

### N 45.98--102 Five Discourses on Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 45.103 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.104--108 Five Discourses on Sloping to the East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasuttapañcaka*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.109 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.110--114 Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.115 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.116--120 Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.121 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.122--126 Sloping to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.127 Slanting East *Paṭhamapācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants,
slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.128--132 Slanting East *Dutiyādipācīnaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the east. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

### N 45.133 Slanting to the Ocean *Paṭhamasamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the ocean.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants,
slopes, and inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.134--138 Slanting to the Ocean *Dutiyādisamuddaninnasutta*

"Mendicants, the Yamunā river slants, slopes, and inclines
to the ocean. ..."

"... the Aciravatī river ..."

"... the Sarabhū river ..."

"... the Mahī river ..."

"... all the great rivers ..."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Diligence

### N 45.139 The Realized One *Tathāgatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who
is diligent develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate in the removal
of greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant who is diligent
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death. That's how a mendicant who is diligent develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path.

Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them. A mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate
the noble eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment. That's how a mendicant who is diligent
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.140 Footprints *Padasutta*

"The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint. So an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and
meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. A
mendicant who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path.

And how does a mendicant who is diligent develop and cultivate the noble
eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. ... That's how a mendicant
who is diligent develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

### N 45.141--145 A Roof Peak *Kūṭādisutta*

"Mendicants, the rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to
the peak, and meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of
them all. In the same way ..."

**(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)**

"Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. ..."

"Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. ..."

"Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. ..."

"All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. ..."

### N 45.146--148 The Moon, Etc. *Candimādisutta*

"The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. ..."

"In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates. ..."

"Mendicants, cloth from Kāsi is said to be the best kind of
woven cloth. ..."

**(Tell these in full as in the section on the Realized One.)**

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 45.149 Hard Work *Balasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, all the hard work that gets done depends on the earth and
is grounded on the earth. In the same way, a mendicant develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics.

And how does a mendicant grounded on ethics develop and cultivate the
noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
grounded on ethics develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path."

"... which culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion ..."

"... culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death ..."

"... slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment ..."

### N 45.150 Seeds *Bījasutta*

"All the plants and seeds that achieve growth, increase, and maturity do
so depending on the earth and grounded on the earth. In the same way, a
mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good
qualities.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good
qualities? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away,
and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops
and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on
ethics, achieving growth, increase, and maturity in good qualities."

### N 45.151 Dragons *Nāgasutta*

"Mendicants, dragons grow and wax strong supported by the Himalayas, the
king of mountains. When they're strong they dive into the pools. Then
they dive into the lakes, the streams, the rivers, and finally the
ocean. There they acquire a great and abundant body. In the same way, a
mendicant develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path depending on
and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and abundant good qualities?
It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring
great and abundant good qualities."

### N 45.152 Trees *Rukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a tree slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. If
it was cut off at the root, where would it fall?"

"Sir, it would fall in the direction that it slants, slopes, and
inclines."

"In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 45.153 Pots *Kumbhasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a pot full of water is tipped over, so the water
drains out and doesn't go back in. In the same way, a mendicant who
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't let them back in.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path expel
bad, unskillful qualities and not let them back in? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path expels bad, unskillful qualities and doesn't
let them back in."

### N 45.154 A Spike *Sūkasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the
skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the
right way.

In the same way, a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way may well break ignorance, produce knowledge, and
realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because their view is pointing the
right way.

And how does a mendicant whose view and development of the path is
pointing the right way break ignorance, give rise to knowledge, and
realize extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
whose view and development of the path is pointing the right way breaks
ignorance, gives rise to knowledge, and realizes extinguishment."

### N 45.155 The Sky *Ākāsasutta*

"Mendicants, various winds blow in the sky. Winds blow from the east,
the west, the north, and the south. There are winds that are dusty and
dustless, cool and warm, weak and strong. In the same way, when the
noble eightfold path is developed and cultivated the following are fully
developed: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five
powers, and the seven awakening factors.

And how are they fully developed? It's when a mendicant develops right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which rely on seclusion,
fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how they're
fully developed."

### N 45.156 Storms (1st) *Paṭhamameghasutta*

"Mendicants, in the last month of summer, when the dust and dirt is
stirred up, a large sudden storm disperses and settles it on the spot.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities on the
spot.

How does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path disperse and
still bad, unskillful qualities on the spot? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble eightfold
path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities on the spot."

### N 45.157 Storms (2nd) *Dutiyameghasutta*

"Mendicants, when a large storm has arisen, a strong wind disperses and
settles it as it proceeds. In the same way, a mendicant who develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful
qualities as they proceed.

And how does a mendicant who develops the noble eightfold path disperse
and still bad, unskillful qualities as they proceed? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates
the noble eightfold path disperses and stills bad, unskillful qualities
as they proceed."

### N 45.158 A Ship *Nāvāsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with
ropes. For six months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold
season it was hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by
wind and sun. When the clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would
readily collapse and rot away. In the same way, when a mendicant
develops and cultivates the noble eightfold path their fetters readily
collapse and rot away.

And how do they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that
their fetters readily collapse and rot away? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
That's how they develop and cultivate the noble eightfold path so that
their fetters readily collapse and rot away."

### N 45.159 A Guest House *Āgantukasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a guest house. Lodgers come from the
east, west, north, and south. Aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials all stay there. In the same way, a mendicant who develops and
cultivates the noble eightfold path completely understands by direct
knowledge the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge. They give up by direct knowledge the things that should be
given up by direct knowledge. They realize by direct knowledge the
things that should be realized by direct knowledge. They develop by
direct knowledge the things that should be developed by direct
knowledge.

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates. What five?
That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. These
are the things that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.
And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for continued existence. These are the things that
should be given up by direct knowledge. And what are the things that
should be realized by direct knowledge? Knowledge and freedom. These are
the things that should be realized by direct knowledge. And what are the
things that should be developed by direct knowledge? Serenity and
discernment. These are the things that should be developed by direct
knowledge.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path in this way?
It's when a mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates
the eightfold path in this way."

### N 45.160 A River *Nadīsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and
inclines to the east, a large crowd were to come along with a spade and
basket, saying: 'We'll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline
to the west!'

What do you think, mendicants? Would they succeed?"

"No, sir. Why is that? The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to
the east. It's not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the
west. That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path, if rulers or their chief ministers, friends or
colleagues, relatives or kin should invite them to accept wealth,
saying: 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment you? Why
follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl?
Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!' It is
quite impossible for a mendicant who develops and cultivates the noble
eightfold path to resign the training and return to a lesser life. Why
is that? Because for a long time that mendicant's mind has slanted,
sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it's impossible for them to return
to a lesser life.

And how does a mendicant develop the noble eightfold path? It's when a
mendicant develops right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates the
noble eightfold path."

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 45.161 Searches *Esanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to directly know these
three searches. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed to directly
know these three searches."

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to completely understand
..."

::: small
*(Tell in full with "completely understand" instead of "directly
know".)*
:::

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to finish ..."

**(Tell in full with "finish" instead of "directly know".)**

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The noble eightfold path should be developed to give up ..."

**(Tell in full with "give up" instead of "directly know".)**

### N 45.162 Discriminations *Vidhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of discrimination. What three? One
discriminates, thinking that 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'.
These are the three kinds of discrimination.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of
discrimination. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.
This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
three kinds of discrimination."

**(Tell in full as in the section on searches.)**

### N 45.163 Defilements *Āsavasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three defilements. What three? The
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are
the three defilements.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
defilements."

### N 45.164 States of Existence *Bhavasutta*

"There are these three states of existence. What three? Existence in the
sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, and the formless realm. These
are the three states of existence.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three states
of existence."

### N 45.165 Forms of Suffering *Dukkhatāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three forms of suffering. What three? The
suffering inherent in painful feeling; the suffering inherent in
conditions; and the suffering inherent in perishing. These are the three
forms of suffering.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three forms of
suffering."

### N 45.166 Kinds of Barrenness *Khilasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of barrenness. What three?
Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the three kinds of barrenness.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three kinds of
barrenness."

### N 45.167 Stains *Malasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three stains. What three? Greed, hate, and
delusion. These are the three stains.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three stains."

### N 45.168 Troubles *Nīghasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three troubles. What three? Greed, hate,
and delusion. These are the three troubles.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
troubles."

### N 45.169 Feelings *Vedanāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings: What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
feelings."

### N 45.170 Craving *Taṇhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three cravings. What three? Craving for
sensual pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end
existence. These are the three cravings.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
cravings. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
three cravings."

#### Thirst

"Mendicants, there are these three thirsts. What three? Thirst for
sensual pleasures, thirst to continue existence, and thirst to end
existence.

For the direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving
up of these three thirsts ... ... which culminates in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... which culminates, finishes, and ends in
freedom from death. ... which slants, slopes, and inclines to
extinguishment.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
thirsts."

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 45.171 Floods *Oghasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four floods. What four? The floods of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, views, and ignorance. These are the
four floods.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four floods."

**(Tell in full as in the section on searches.)**

### N 45.172 Yokes *Yogasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four yokes. What four? The yokes of sensual
pleasures, future lives, views, and ignorance. These are the four yokes.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four yokes."

### N 45.173 Grasping *Upādānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of grasping. What four? Grasping
at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self. These are the four kinds of grasping.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four kinds of
grasping."

### N 45.174 Personal Ties *Ganthasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ties. What four? The personal ties to
covetousness, ill will, misapprehension of precepts and observances, and
the insistence that this is the only truth. These are the four ties.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these four ties."

### N 45.175 Tendencies *Anusayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven underlying tendencies. What seven?
The underlying tendencies of sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are the seven
underlying tendencies.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these seven
underlying tendencies."

### N 45.176 Kinds of Sensual Stimulation *Kāmaguṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What
five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five kinds of
sensual stimulation."

### N 45.177 Hindrances *Nīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five hindrances. What five? The hindrances
of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and
remorse, and doubt. These are the five hindrances.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five
hindrances."

### N 45.178 Grasping Aggregates *Upādānakkhandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? The
grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. These are the five grasping aggregates.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five grasping
aggregates."

### N 45.179 Lower Fetters *Orambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five lower fetters. What five? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five lowers
fetters."

### N 45.180 Higher Fetters *Uddhambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters."

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The noble eightfold path should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What is the noble eightfold path? It's when a mendicant
develops right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion, which
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion ..." "... which
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death ..." "... which slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment.

This is the noble eightfold path that should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters."

*The Linked Discourses on the Path is the first section.*

# Linked Discourses on the Awakening Factors

## The Chapter on Mountains

### N 46.1 The Himalaya *Himavantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, dragons grow and wax strong supported by the Himalayas, the
king of mountains. When they're strong they dive into the pools. Then
they dive into the lakes, the streams, the rivers, and finally the
ocean. There they acquire a great and abundant body.

In the same way, a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening
factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and
abundant good qualities. And how does a mendicant develop the seven
awakening factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great
and abundant good qualities?

It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness,
which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as
letting go.

They develop the awakening factor of investigation of principles ...

They develop the awakening factor of energy ...

They develop the awakening factor of rapture ...

They develop the awakening factor of tranquility ...

They develop the awakening factor of immersion ...

They develop the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go.

That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening
factors depending on and grounded on ethics, acquiring great and
abundant good qualities."

### N 46.2 The Body *Kāyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, this body is sustained by food. It depends on food to
continue, and without food it doesn't continue. In the same way, the
five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue,
and without fuel they don't continue.

And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen,
makes it increase and grow? There is the feature of beauty. Frequent
irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of sensual
desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it
increase and grow? There is the feature of harshness. Frequent
irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of ill will,
or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they
have arisen, makes them increase and grow? There is discontent, sloth,
yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness. Frequent
irrational application of mind to them fuels the arising of dullness and
drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they
have arisen, makes them increase and grow? There is the unsettled mind.
Frequent irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of
restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase
and grow.

And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it
increase and grow? There are things that are grounds for doubt. Frequent
irrational application of mind to them fuels the arising of doubt, or,
when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and
without food it doesn't continue. In the same way, the five hindrances
are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel
they don't continue.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and
without food it doesn't continue. In the same way, the seven awakening
factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and
without fuel they don't continue.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds
for the awakening factor of mindfulness. Frequent rational application
of mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of
mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of
principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are
qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless,
inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright.
Frequent rational application of mind to them fuels the arising of the
awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen,
fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it? There are the elements of initiative,
persistence, and exertion. Frequent rational application of mind to them
fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has
arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds for
the awakening factor of rapture. Frequent rational application of mind
to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There is tranquility of the body
and of the mind. Frequent rational application of mind to that fuels the
arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen,
fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are the
basis of serenity and freedom from distraction. Frequent rational
application of mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of
immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds
for the awakening factor of equanimity. Frequent rational application of
mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity,
or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and
without food it doesn't continue. In the same way, the seven awakening
factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and
without fuel they don't continue."

### N 46.3 Ethics *Sīlasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
knowledge, freedom, or the knowledge and vision of freedom, even the
sight of them is very helpful, I say. Even to hear them, approach them,
pay homage to them, recollect them, or go forth following them is very
helpful, I say. Why is that? Because after hearing the teaching of such
mendicants, a mendicant will live withdrawn in both body and mind, as
they recollect and think about that teaching.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
mindfulness; they develop it and perfect it. As they live mindfully in
this way they investigate, explore, and inquire into that teaching with
wisdom.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
investigation of principles; they develop it and perfect it. As they
investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is roused up
and unflagging.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
energy; they develop it and perfect it. When they're energetic, rapture
not of the flesh arises.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
rapture; they develop it and perfect it. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body and mind become tranquil.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
tranquility; they develop it and perfect it. When the body is tranquil
and one feels bliss, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
immersion; they develop it and perfect it. They closely watch over that
mind immersed in samādhi.

At such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
equanimity; they develop it and perfect it.

When the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated in this
way they can expect seven fruits and benefits. What seven? They attain
enlightenment early on in this very life. If not, they attain
enlightenment at the time of death. If not, with the ending of the five
lower fetters, they're extinguished between one life and the next. If
not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished without extra effort. If not, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're extinguished with extra effort. If not, with the
ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the
Akaniṭṭha realm. When the seven awakening factors are
developed and cultivated in this way these are the seven fruits and
benefits they can expect."

### N 46.4 Clothes *Vatthasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"There are these seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven awakening
factors.

In the morning, I meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors
I want. At midday, and in the evening, I meditate on whichever of these
seven awakening factors I want. If it's the awakening factor of
mindfulness, I know that it's limitless and that it's properly
implemented. While it remains I understand that it remains. And if it
subsides in me I understand the specific reason it subsides. ... If it's
the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that it's limitless and that
it's properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it
remains. And if it subsides I understand the specific reason it
subsides.

Suppose that a ruler or their chief minister had a chest full of
garments of different colors. In the morning, they'd don whatever pair
of garments they wanted. At midday, and in the evening, they'd don
whatever pair of garments they wanted.

In the same way, in the morning, at midday, and in the evening, I
meditate on whichever of these seven awakening factors I want. If it's
the awakening factor of mindfulness, I know that it's limitless and that
it's properly implemented. While it remains I understand that it
remains. And if it subsides I understand the specific reason it
subsides. ... If it's the awakening factor of equanimity, I know that
it's limitless and that it's properly implemented. While it remains I
understand that it remains. And if it subsides I understand the specific
reason it subsides."

### N 46.5 A Monk *Bhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of the 'awakening factors'. How are the awakening factors
defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called awakening factors because they lead to
awakening.

A mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation
of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity,
which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as
letting go. As they develop the seven awakening factors, their mind is
freed from the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance. When they're freed, they know they're freed. They understand:
'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to
be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.'

They're called awakening factors because they lead to awakening."

### N 46.6 Kuṇḍaliya *Kuṇḍaliyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa in the deer
park at the Añjana Wood. Then the wanderer
Kuṇḍaliya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, I like to hang around the monasteries and visit the
assemblies. When I've finished breakfast, it's my habit to wander from
monastery to monastery, from park to park. There I see some ascetics and
brahmins speaking for the sake of winning debates and finding fault. But
what benefit does the worthy Gotama live for?"

"The benefit the Realized One lives for, Kuṇḍaliya, is the
fruit of knowledge and freedom."

"But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill
knowledge and freedom?"

"The seven awakening factors."

"But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill
the seven awakening factors?"

"The four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

"But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?"

"The three kinds of good conduct."

"But what things must be developed and cultivated in order to fulfill
the three kinds of good conduct?"

"Sense restraint.

And Kuṇḍaliya, how is sense restraint developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds of good conduct? A mendicant
sees an agreeable sight with their eye. They don't desire it or enjoy
it, and they don't give rise to greed. Their mind and body are steady
internally, well settled and well freed. But if they see a disagreeable
sight they're not dismayed; their mind isn't hardened, dejected, or full
of ill will. Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and
well freed.

Furthermore, a mendicant hears an agreeable sound with the ear ...
smells an agreeable odor with the nose ... tastes an agreeable flavor
with the tongue ... feels an agreeable touch with the body ... knows an
agreeable idea with their mind. They don't desire it or enjoy it, and
they don't give rise to greed. Their mind and body are steady
internally, well settled and well freed. But if they know a disagreeable
idea they're not dismayed; their mind isn't hardened, dejected, or full
of ill will. Their mind and body are steady internally, well settled and
well freed.

When a mendicant's mind and body are steady internally, they're well
settled and well freed when it comes to both agreeable and disagreeable
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. That's how sense
restraint is developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the three kinds
of good conduct.

And how are the three kinds of good conduct developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? A mendicant
gives up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develops good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's how the three kinds of
good conduct are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? A mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to fulfill knowledge and freedom? A mendicant develops the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how the seven
awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill
knowledge and freedom."

When he said this, the wanderer Kuṇḍaliya said to the
Buddha, "Excellent, worthy Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, worthy Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the worthy
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 46.7 A Bungalow *Kūṭāgārasutta*

"Mendicants, the rafters of a bungalow all slant, slope, and incline to
the peak. In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the
seven awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the seven awakening factors slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

### N 46.8 With Upavāna *Upavānasutta*

At one time the venerables Upavāna and
Sāriputta were staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable
Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Upavāna and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to Upavāna:

"Reverend Upavāna, can a mendicant know by investigating
inside themselves that the seven awakening factors are well implemented
so that they lead to living at ease?"

"They can, Reverend Sāriputta.

As a mendicant rouses up the awakening factor of mindfulness, they
understand: 'My mind is well freed. I've eradicated dullness and
drowsiness, and eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused
up, and my mind is sharply focused, not sluggish.' ...

As they rouse up the awakening factor of equanimity, they understand:
'My mind is well freed. I've eradicated dullness and drowsiness, and
eliminated restlessness and remorse. My energy is roused up, and my mind
is sharply focused, not sluggish.'

That's how a mendicant can know by investigating inside themselves that
the seven awakening factors are well implemented so that they lead to
living at ease."

### N 46.9 Arisen (1st) *Paṭhamauppannasutta*

"Mendicants, these seven awakening factors don't arise to be developed
and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha has appeared. What seven? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening factors don't arise to
be developed and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one,
a fully awakened Buddha has appeared."

### N 46.10 Arisen (2nd) *Dutiyauppannasutta*

"Mendicants, these seven awakening factors don't arise to be developed
and cultivated apart from the Holy One's training. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening
factors don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart from the Holy
One's training."

## The Chapter on Sick

### N 46.11 Living Creatures *Pāṇasutta*

"Mendicants, living creatures engage in the four postures: sometimes
walking, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting, sometimes lying down.
They do so depending on the earth and grounded on the earth. In the same
way, a mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors
depending on and grounded on ethics.

And how does a mendicant develop the seven awakening factors depending
on and grounded on ethics? It's when a mendicant develops the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors depending on and
grounded on ethics."

### N 46.12 The Simile of the Sun (1st) *Paṭhamasūriyūpamasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way, for a mendicant good friendship is the forerunner and
precursor of the arising of the seven awakening factors. A mendicant
with good friends can expect to develop and cultivate the seven
awakening factors.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
seven awakening factors? It's when a mendicant develops the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.13 The Simile of the Sun (2nd) *Dutiyasūriyūpamasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise. In
the same way, for a mendicant rational application of mind is the
forerunner and precursor of the arising of the seven awakening factors.
A mendicant accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to
develop and cultivate the seven awakening factors.

And how does a mendicant with rational application of mind develop and
cultivate the seven awakening factors? It's when a mendicant develops
the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant with rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.14 Sick (1st) *Paṭhamagilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time Venerable
Mahākassapa was staying in the Pipphali cave, and he was
sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha
came out of retreat, went to Venerable Mahākassapa, sat
down on the seat spread out, and said to him:

"I hope you're keeping well, Kassapa; I hope you're all right. And I
hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not
its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"Kassapa, I've rightly explained these seven awakening factors. When
developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to awakening,
and to extinguishment. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,
and equanimity. These are the seven awakening factors that I've rightly
explained. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge,
to awakening, and to extinguishment."

"Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors! Indeed, Holy One,
these are awakening factors!"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable
Mahākassapa approved what the Buddha said. And that's how
he recovered from that illness.

### N 46.15 Sick (2nd) *Dutiyagilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna was staying on the Vulture's Peak mountain,
and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then in the late afternoon, the
Buddha came out of retreat, went to Venerable Moggallāna,
sat down on the seat spread out, and said to him:

"I hope you're keeping well, Moggallāna; I hope you're all
right. And I hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is
evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"Moggallāna, I've rightly explained these seven awakening
factors. When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge,
to awakening, and to extinguishment. What seven? The awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven awakening
factors that I've rightly explained. When developed and cultivated, they
lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment."

"Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors! Indeed, Holy One,
these are awakening factors!"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna approved what the Buddha said. And that's
how he recovered from that illness.

### N 46.16 Sick (3rd) *Tatiyagilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time he was
sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then Venerable Mahācunda went
up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to
him:

"Cunda, express your understanding of the awakening factors."

"Sir, the Buddha has rightly explained these seven awakening factors.
When developed and cultivated, they lead to direct knowledge, to
awakening, and to extinguishment. What seven? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven awakening factors that
the Buddha has rightly explained. When developed and cultivated, they
lead to direct knowledge, to awakening, and to extinguishment."

"Indeed, Cunda, these are awakening factors! Indeed, Cunda, these are
awakening factors!"

This is what Cunda said, and the teacher approved. And that's how the
Buddha recovered from that illness.

### N 46.17 Going to the Far Shore *Pāraṅgamasutta*

"Mendicants, when these seven awakening factors are developed and
cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What
seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
These seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, lead to
going from the near shore to the far shore.

> Few are those among humans\
> who cross to the far shore.\
> The rest just run\
> around on the near shore.
>
> When the teaching is well explained,\
> those who practice accordingly\
> are the ones who will cross over\
> Death's dominion so hard to pass.
>
> Rid of dark qualities,\
> an astute person should develop the bright.\
> Leaving home behind\
> for the seclusion so hard to enjoy,
>
> you should try to find delight there,\
> having left behind sensual pleasures.\
> With no possessions, an astute person\
> should cleanse themselves of mental corruptions.
>
> And those whose minds are rightly developed\
> in the awakening factors;\
> letting go of attachments,\
> they delight in not grasping.\
> With defilements ended, brilliant,\
> they are quenched in this world."

### N 46.18 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the seven awakening factors has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken the seven awakening factors has undertaken the
noble path to the complete ending of suffering. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. Whoever has missed out
on these seven awakening factors has missed out on the noble path to the
complete ending of suffering. Whoever has undertaken these seven
awakening factors has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending
of suffering."

### N 46.19 Noble *Ariyasutta*

"Mendicants, when these seven awakening factors are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. When these seven awakening
factors are developed and cultivated they are noble and emancipating,
and bring one who practices them to the complete ending of suffering."

### N 46.20 Disillusionment *Nibbidāsutta*

"Mendicants, the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated,
lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. What seven? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening factors, when developed
and cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

## The Chapter with Udāyī

### N 46.21 To Awakening *Bodhāyasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of the 'awakening factors'. How are the awakening
factors defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called awakening factors because they lead to
awakening. A mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,
and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. They're called awakening factors because they lead
to awakening."

### N 46.22 A Teaching on the Awakening Factors *Bojjhaṅgadesanāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the seven awakening factors. Listen ...

And what are the seven awakening factors? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.23 Grounds *Ṭhāniyasutta*

"Mendicants, when you frequently apply the mind to things that are
grounds for sensual greed, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows. When you frequently apply the mind to things that
are grounds for ill will, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases
and grows. When you frequently apply the mind to things that are grounds
for dullness and drowsiness, dullness and drowsiness arise, and once
arisen they increase and grow. When you frequently apply the mind to
things that are grounds for restlessness and remorse, restlessness and
remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. When you
frequently apply the mind to things that are grounds for doubt, doubt
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows.

When you frequently apply the mind to things that are grounds for the
awakening factor of mindfulness, the awakening factor of mindfulness
arises, and once arisen it's fully developed. ... When you frequently
apply the mind to things that are grounds for the awakening factor of
equanimity, the awakening factor of equanimity arises, and once arisen
it's fully developed."

### N 46.24 Irrational Application of Mind *Ayonisomanasikārasutta*

"Mendicants, when you apply the mind irrationally, sensual desire, ill
will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt
arise, and once arisen they increase and grow. And the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity don't arise, or if they've
already arisen, they cease.

When you apply the mind rationally, sensual desire, ill will, dullness
and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt don't arise, or if
they've already arisen they're given up.

And the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity arise, and once
they've arisen, they're fully developed."

### N 46.25 Non-decline *Aparihāniyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you seven principles that prevent decline.
Listen ...

And what are the seven principles that prevent decline? They are the
seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven principles that prevent
decline."

### N 46.26 The Ending of Craving *Taṇhakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to
the ending of craving. And what is the path and the practice that leads
to the ending of craving? It is the seven awakening factors. What seven?
The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity." When he said
this, Udāyī said to him:

"Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to lead to the ending of craving?"

"Udāyī, it's when a mendicant develops the awakening factor
of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and
free of ill will. As they do so, craving is given up. When craving is
given up, deeds are given up. When deeds are given up, suffering is
given up. ...

A mendicant develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it
is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. As they do so,
craving is given up. When craving is given up, deeds are given up. When
deeds are given up, suffering is given up.

And so, Udāyī, when craving ends, deeds end; when deeds end
suffering ends."

### N 46.27 The Cessation of Craving *Taṇhānirodhasutta*

"Mendicants, you should develop the path and the practice that leads to
the cessation of craving. And what is the path and the practice that
leads to the cessation of craving? It is the seven awakening factors.
What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. And
how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to
lead to the cessation of craving?

It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,

and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. This is how the seven awakening factors are
developed and cultivated so as to lead to the cessation of craving."

### N 46.28 Helping Penetration *Nibbedhabhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a path that helps penetration. Listen ...

And what is the path that helps penetration? It is the seven awakening
factors. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation
of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity."
When he said this, Udāyī said to him:

"Sir, how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to lead to penetration?"

"Udāyī, it's when a mendicant develops the awakening factor
of mindfulness, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation,
and ripens as letting go. And it is abundant, expansive, limitless, and
free of ill will. With a mind that has developed the awakening factor of
mindfulness, they penetrate and shatter the mass of greed, the mass of
hate, and the mass of delusion for the first time. ...

A mendicant develops the awakening factor of equanimity, which relies on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. And it
is abundant, expansive, limitless, and free of ill will. With a mind
that has developed the awakening factor of equanimity, they penetrate
and shatter the mass of greed, the mass of hate, and the mass of
delusion for the first time.

This is how are the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated
so as to lead to penetration."

### N 46.29 One Thing *Ekadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and
cultivated like this, leads to giving up the things that are prone to
being fettered like the seven awakening factors. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. And how are the seven
awakening factors developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up
the things that are prone to being fettered?

It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,
and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how the seven awakening factors are
developed and cultivated so as to lead to giving up the things that are
prone to being fettered.

And what are the things that are prone to being fettered? The eye is
something that's prone to being fettered. This is where these fetters,
shackles, and attachments arise. The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind is something that's prone to being fettered. This is where
these fetters, shackles, and attachments arise. These are called the
things that are prone to being fettered."

### N 46.30 With Udāyī *Udāyisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the
town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. Then Venerable Udāyī
went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How helpful my love and respect for
the Buddha have been, and my sense of conscience and prudence. For when
I was still a layman, I wasn't helped much by the teaching or the
Saṅgha. But when I considered my love and respect for the
Buddha, and my sense of conscience and prudence, I went forth from the
lay life to homelessness. The Buddha taught me the Dhamma: 'Such is
form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.'

Then, while staying in an empty hut, I followed the churning of the five
grasping aggregates. I truly understood: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. I
comprehended the teaching; I acquired the path. When developed and
cultivated as I'm living in such a way, it will bring me to such a state
that I will understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has
been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.'

I acquired the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
When developed and cultivated as I'm living in such a way, they will
bring me to such a state that I will understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the
spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done,
there is nothing further for this place.' This is the path that I
acquired. When developed and cultivated as I'm living in such a way, it
will bring me to such a state that I will understand: 'Rebirth is ended,
the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been
done, there is nothing further for this place.'"

"Good, good, Udāyī! For that is indeed the path that you
acquired. When developed and cultivated as you're living in such a way,
it will bring you to such a state that you will understand: 'Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place.'"

## The Chapter on Hindrances

### N 46.31 Skillful (1st) *Paṭhamakusalasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever qualities are skillful, part of the skillful, on
the side of the skillful, all of them are rooted in diligence and meet
at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them. A mendicant
who is diligent can expect to develop and cultivate the seven awakening
factors.

And how does a diligent mendicant develop and cultivate the seven
awakening factors? It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a diligent
mendicant develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.32 Skillful (2nd) *Dutiyakusalasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever qualities are skillful, part of the skillful, on
the side of the skillful, all of them are rooted in rational application
of mind and meet at rational application of mind, and rational
application of mind is said to be the best of them. A mendicant
accomplished in rational application of mind can expect to develop and
cultivate the seven awakening factors.

And how does a mendicant with rational application of mind develop and
cultivate the seven awakening factors? It's when a mendicant develops
the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant with rational application of mind develops and
cultivates the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.33 Corruptions *Upakkilesasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of native gold. When
native gold is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or
radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. What five?
Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver. When native gold is corrupted by
these five corruptions it's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is
brittle and not completely ready for working.

In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the
mind is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or radiant. It's
brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending
of defilements. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five
corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it's not
pliable, workable, or radiant. It's brittle, and not rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements."

### N 46.34 Not Corruptions *Anupakkilesasutta*

"Mendicants, these seven awakening factors are not obstacles,
hindrances, or corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated
they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What
seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or
corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the
realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom."

### N 46.35 Irrational Application of Mind *Yonisomanasikārasutta*

"Mendicants, when you apply the mind irrationally, sensual desire, ill
will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt
arise, and once arisen they increase and grow."

"Mendicants, when you apply the mind rationally, the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity arise, and once they've arisen,
they're fully developed."

### N 46.36 Growth *Buddhisutta*

"Mendicants, when the seven awakening factors are developed and
cultivated they lead to growth and progress. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. When these seven awakening
factors are developed and cultivated they lead to growth and progress."

### N 46.37 Obstacles *Āvaraṇanīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles and hindrances, corruptions
of the heart that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are
the five obstacles and hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom.

There are these seven awakening factors that are not obstacles,
hindrances, or corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated
they lead to the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What
seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or
corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the
realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom."

### N 46.38 Without Obstacles *Anīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, sometimes a noble disciple pays attention, applies the
mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens to the teaching.
At such a time the five hindrances are absent, and the seven awakening
factors are fully developed.

What are the five hindrances that are absent? Sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are
the five hindrances that are absent.

And what are the seven awakening factors that are fully developed? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These are the seven
awakening factors that are fully developed. Sometimes a noble disciple
pays attention, applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and
actively listens to the teaching. At such a time the five hindrances are
absent, and the seven awakening factors are fully developed."

### N 46.39 Trees *Rukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are large trees with tiny seeds and big trunks, which
grow up and around other trees as parasites. The trees they engulf break
apart, collapse, and fall. And what are those large trees with tiny
seeds and big trunks? The peepal, banyan, wavy leaf fig, cluster fig,
Moreton Bay fig, and portia. These are the large trees with tiny seeds
and big trunks, which grow up and around other trees as parasites. The
trees they engulf break apart, collapse, and fall.

In the same way, take a certain gentleman who has gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness, abandoning sensual pleasures. But beset by
sensual pleasures that are similar, or even worse, he breaks apart,
collapses, and falls.

There are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind
that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five
obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom.

These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or
parasites of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the
realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening
factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or parasites of the mind. When
developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of
knowledge and freedom."

### N 46.40 Hindrances *Nīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, these five hindrances are destroyers of sight, vision, and
knowledge. They block wisdom, they're on the side of distress, and they
don't lead to extinguishment. What five? Sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These five
hindrances are destroyers of sight, vision, and knowledge. They block
wisdom, they're on the side of distress, and they don't lead to
extinguishment.

These seven awakening factors are creators of vision and knowledge. They
grow wisdom, they're on the side of solace, and they lead to
extinguishment. What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,
and equanimity. These seven awakening factors are creators of vision and
knowledge. They grow wisdom, they're on the side of solace, and they
lead to extinguishment."

## The Chapter on the Wheel-Turning Monarch

### N 46.41 Discriminations *Vidhāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have given up
the three discriminations have done so by developing and cultivating the
seven awakening factors. All the ascetics and brahmins in the future who
will give up the three discriminations will do so by developing and
cultivating the seven awakening factors. All the ascetics and brahmins
in the present who are giving up the three discriminations do so by
developing and cultivating the seven awakening factors.

What seven? The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. All
the ascetics and brahmins in the past ... future ... and present who
give up the three discriminations do so by developing and cultivating
the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.42 A Wheel-Turning Monarch *Cakkavattisutta*

"Mendicants, when a Wheel-Turning Monarch appears seven treasures
appear. What seven? The wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the
woman, the householder, and the commander. When a Wheel-Turning Monarch
appears these seven treasures appear.

When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha appears
the seven treasures of the awakening factors appear. What seven? The
treasures of the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha appears
these seven treasures of the awakening factors appear."

### N 46.43 About Māra *Mārasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a path for crushing Māra's
army. Listen ...

And what is that path? It is the seven awakening factors. What seven?
The awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. This is the
path for crushing Māra's army."

### N 46.44 Witless *Duppaññasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of 'a witless idiot'. How is a witless idiot defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called a witless idiot because they haven't
developed and cultivated the seven awakening factors. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. They're called a
witless idiot because they haven't developed and cultivated these seven
awakening factors."

### N 46.45 Wise *Paññavantasutta*

"Sir they speak of a person who is 'wise and clever'. How is a person
who is wise and clever defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called wise and clever because they've developed and
cultivated the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. They're called wise and clever
because they've developed and cultivated these seven awakening factors."

### N 46.46 Poor *Daliddasutta*

"Sir, they speak of someone who is 'poor'. How is a poor person
defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called poor because they haven't developed and
cultivated the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. They're called poor because they
haven't developed and cultivated these seven awakening factors."

### N 46.47 Prosperous *Adaliddasutta*

"Sir, they speak of someone who is 'prosperous'. How is a prosperous
person defined?"

"Mendicant, they're called prosperous because they've developed and
cultivated the seven awakening factors. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. They're called prosperous
because they've developed and cultivated these seven awakening factors."

### N 46.48 The Sun *Ādiccasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise.

In the same way, for a mendicant good friendship is the forerunner and
precursor of the arising of the seven awakening factors. A mendicant
with good friends can expect to develop and cultivate the seven
awakening factors.

And how does a mendicant with good friends develop and cultivate the
seven awakening factors? It's when a mendicant develops the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
with good friends develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors."

### N 46.49 Interior *Ajjhattikaṅgasutta*

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that gives rise to the seven awakening factors like rational
application of mind. ..."

### N 46.50 Exterior *Bāhiraṅgasutta*

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that gives rise to the seven awakening factors like good friendship.
..."

## The Chapter on Discussion

### N 46.51 Nourishing *Āhārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you what fuels and what starves the five
hindrances and the seven awakening factors. Listen ...

And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen,
makes it increase and grow? There is the feature of beauty. Frequent
irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of sensual
desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it
increase and grow? There is the feature of harshness. Frequent
irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of ill will,
or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they
have arisen, makes them increase and grow? There is discontent, sloth,
yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness. Frequent
irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of dullness and
drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they
have arisen, makes them increase and grow? There is the unsettled mind.
Frequent irrational application of mind to that fuels the arising of
restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase
and grow.

And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it
increase and grow? There are things that are grounds for doubt. Frequent
irrational application of mind to them fuels the arising of doubt, or,
when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds
for the awakening factor of mindfulness. Frequent rational application
of mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of
mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of
principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are
qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless,
inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and bright.
Frequent rational application of mind to them fuels the arising of the
awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen,
fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it? There are the elements of initiative,
persistence, and exertion. Frequent rational application of mind to them
fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has
arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds for
the awakening factor of rapture. Frequent rational application of mind
to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when
it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There is tranquility of the body
and of the mind. Frequent rational application of mind to that fuels the
arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen,
fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are the
basis of serenity and freedom from distraction. Frequent rational
application of mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of
immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or,
when it has arisen, fully develops it? There are things that are grounds
for the awakening factor of equanimity. Frequent rational application of
mind to them fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity,
or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what starves the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen,
starves its increase and growth? There is the feature of ugliness.
Frequent rational application of mind to that starves the arising of
sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, starves its increase and growth.

And what starves the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen,
starves its increase and growth? There is the heart's release by love.
Frequent rational application of mind to that starves the arising of ill
will, or, when it has arisen, starves its increase and growth.

And what starves the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they
have arisen, starves their increase and growth? There are the elements
of initiative, persistence, and exertion. Frequent rational application
of mind to them starves the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when
they have arisen, starves their increase and growth.

And what starves the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they
have arisen, starves their increase and growth? There is the settled
mind. Frequent rational application of mind to that starves the arising
of restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, starves their
increase and growth.

And what starves the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, starves
its increase and growth? There are qualities that are skillful and
unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those
on the side of dark and bright. Frequent rational application of mind to
them starves the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, starves its
increase and growth.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or,
when it has arisen, starves its full development? There are things that
are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness. Not frequently
applying the mind to that starves the arising of the awakening factor of
mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of
principles, or, when it has arisen, starves its full development? There
are qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and
blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side of dark and
bright. Not frequently applying the mind to that starves the arising of
the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has
arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when
it has arisen, starves its full development? There are the elements of
initiative, persistence, and exertion. Not frequently applying the mind
to that starves the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when
it has arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or,
when it has arisen, starves its full development? There are things that
are grounds for the awakening factor of rapture. Not frequently applying
the mind to that starves the arising of the awakening factor of rapture,
or, when it has arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or,
when it has arisen, starves its full development? There is tranquility
of the body and of the mind. Not frequently applying the mind to that
starves the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it
has arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or,
when it has arisen, starves its full development? There are things that
are the basis of serenity and freedom from distraction. Not frequently
applying the mind to that starves the arising of the awakening factor of
immersion, or, when it has arisen, starves its full development.

And what starves the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or,
when it has arisen, starves its full development? There are things that
are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity. Not frequently
applying the mind to that starves the arising of the awakening factor of
equanimity, or, when it has arisen, starves its full development."

### N 46.52 Is There a Way? *Pariyāyasutta*

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to
him, "It's too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why
don't we visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?"

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers
said to them:

"Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this:
'Mendicants, please give up the five hindrances---corruptions of the
heart that weaken wisdom---and truly develop the seven awakening
factors.' We too teach our disciples: 'Reverends, please give up the
five hindrances---corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom---and
truly develop the seven awakening factors.' What, then, is the
difference between the ascetic Gotama's teaching and instruction and
ours?"

Those mendicants neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the
wanderers of other religions. They got up from their seat, thinking:

"We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."
Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'But reverends, is there a way in which the five hindrances
become ten and the seven awakening factors become fourteen?' Questioned
like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in
addition, would get frustrated. Why is that? Because they're out of
their element. I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans---who could provide a satisfying
answer to these questions except for the Realized One or his disciple or
someone who has heard it from them.

And what is the way in which the five hindrances become ten? Sensual
desire for what is internal is a hindrance; and sensual desire for what
is external is also a hindrance. That's how what is concisely referred
to as 'the hindrance of sensual desire' becomes twofold. Ill will for
what is internal is a hindrance; and ill will for what is external is
also a hindrance. That's how what is concisely referred to as 'the
hindrance of ill will' becomes twofold. Dullness is a hindrance; and
drowsiness is also a hindrance. That's how what is concisely referred to
as 'the hindrance of dullness and drowsiness' becomes twofold.
Restlessness is a hindrance; and remorse is also a hindrance. That's how
what is concisely referred to as 'the hindrance of restlessness and
remorse' becomes twofold. Doubt about internal things is a hindrance;
and doubt about external things is also a hindrance. That's how what is
concisely referred to as 'the hindrance of doubt' becomes twofold. This
is the way in which the five hindrances become ten.

And what is the way in which the seven awakening factors become
fourteen? Mindfulness of internal things is the awakening factor of
mindfulness; and mindfulness of external things is also the awakening
factor of mindfulness. That's how what is concisely referred to as 'the
awakening factor of mindfulness' becomes twofold.

Investigating, exploring, and inquiring into internal things with wisdom
is the awakening factor of investigation of principles; and
investigating, exploring, and inquiring into external things with wisdom
is also the awakening factor of investigation of principles. That's how
what is concisely referred to as 'the awakening factor of investigation
of principles' becomes twofold.

Physical energy is the awakening factor of energy; and mental energy is
also the awakening factor of energy. That's how what is concisely
referred to as 'the awakening factor of energy' becomes twofold.

Rapture while placing the mind and keeping it connected is the awakening
factor of rapture; and rapture without placing the mind and keeping it
connected is also the awakening factor of rapture. In this way what is
concisely referred to as 'the awakening factor of rapture' becomes
twofold.

Physical tranquility is the awakening factor of tranquility; and mental
tranquility is also the awakening factor of tranquility. In this way
what is concisely referred to as 'the awakening factor of tranquility'
becomes twofold.

Immersion while placing the mind and keeping it connected is the
awakening factor of immersion; and immersion without placing the mind
and keeping it connected is also the awakening factor of immersion. In
this way what is concisely referred to as 'the awakening factor of
immersion' becomes twofold.

Equanimity for internal things is the awakening factor of equanimity;
and equanimity for external things is also the awakening factor of
equanimity. In this way what is concisely referred to as 'the awakening
factor of equanimity' becomes twofold. This is the way in which the
seven awakening factors become fourteen."

### N 46.53 Fire *Aggisutta*

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

**(The same as the previous discourse.)**

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'Reverends, which awakening factors should not be developed
when the mind is sluggish? And which awakening factors should be
developed at that time? Which awakening factors should not be developed
when the mind is restless? And which awakening factors should be
developed at that time?' Questioned like this, the wanderers of other
religions would be stumped, and, in addition, would get frustrated. Why
is that? Because they're out of their element.

I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods, Māras,
and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods
and humans---who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions
except for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it
from them.

When the mind is sluggish, it's the wrong time to develop the awakening
factors of tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. Why is that? Because
it's hard to stimulate a sluggish mind with these things.

Suppose someone wanted to make a small fire flare up. If they toss wet
grass, cow-dung, and timber on it, spray it with water, and scatter dirt
on it, could they make it flare up?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when the mind is sluggish, it's the wrong time to
develop the awakening factors of tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
Why is that? Because it's hard to stimulate a sluggish mind with these
things.

When the mind is sluggish, it's the right time to develop the awakening
factors of investigation of principles, energy, and rapture. Why is
that? Because it's easy to stimulate a sluggish mind with these things.

Suppose someone wanted to make a small fire flare up. If they toss dry
grass, cow-dung, and timber on it, blow on it, and don't scatter dirt on
it, could they make it flare up?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when the mind is sluggish, it's the right time to
develop the awakening factors of investigation of principles, energy,
and rapture. Why is that? Because it's easy to stimulate a sluggish mind
with these things.

When the mind is restless, it's the wrong time to develop the awakening
factors of investigation of principles, energy, and rapture. Why is
that? Because it's hard to settle a restless mind with these things.

Suppose someone wanted to extinguish a great mass of fire. If they toss
dry grass, cow-dung, and timber on it, blow on it, and don't scatter
dirt on it, could they extinguish it?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, when the mind is restless, it's the wrong time to
develop the awakening factors of investigation of principles, energy,
and rapture. Why is that? Because it's hard to settle a restless mind
with these things.

When the mind is restless, it's the right time to develop the awakening
factors of tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. Why is that? Because
it's easy to settle a restless mind with these things.

Suppose someone wanted to extinguish a great mass of fire. If they toss
wet grass, cow-dung, and timber on it, spray it with water, and scatter
dirt on it, could they extinguish it?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when the mind is restless, it's the right time to
develop the awakening factors of tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.
Why is that? Because it's easy to settle a restless mind with these
things. But mindfulness is always useful, I say."

### N 46.54 Full of Love *Mettāsahagatasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where
they have a town called Haliddavasana. Then several mendicants robed up
in the morning and, taking their bowls and robes, entered Haliddavasana
for alms. Then it occurred to them, "It's too early to wander for alms
in Haliddavasana. Why don't we visit the monastery of the wanderers of
other religions?"

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers
said to them:

"Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this: 'Come,
mendicants, give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom, and meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, spread a heart full of compassion to the whole world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. Meditate spreading a
heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will.'

We too teach our disciples in just the same way. What, then, is the
difference between the ascetic Gotama's teaching and instruction and
ours?"

Those mendicants neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the
wanderers of other religions. They got up from their seat, thinking:

"We will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."
Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'But reverends, how is the heart's release by love developed?
What is its destination, apex, fruit, and culmination? How is the
heart's release by compassion developed? What is its destination, apex,
fruit, and end? How is the heart's release by rejoicing developed? What
is its destination, apex, fruit, and end? How is the heart's release by
equanimity developed? What is its destination, apex, fruit, and end?'
Questioned like this, the wanderers of other religions would be stumped,
and, in addition, would get frustrated. Why is that? Because they're out
of their element. I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans---who could provide a satisfying
answer to these questions except for the Realized One or his disciple or
someone who has heard it from them.

And how is the heart's release by love developed? What is its
destination, apex, fruit, and end? It's when a mendicant develops the
heart's release by love together with the awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripen as letting go. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,'
that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive
and the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and
the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. The apex of the heart's release
by love is the beautiful, I say, for a mendicant who has not penetrated
to a higher freedom.

And how is the heart's release by compassion developed? What is its
destination, apex, fruit, and end? It's when a mendicant develops the
heart's release by compassion together with the awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripen as letting go. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. ...
If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware,
rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's what they do.
Or else, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension
of infinite space. The apex of the heart's release by compassion is the
dimension of infinite space, I say, for a mendicant who has not
penetrated to a higher freedom.

And how is the heart's release by rejoicing developed? What is its
destination, apex, fruit, and end? It's when a mendicant develops the
heart's release by rejoicing together with the awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripen as letting go. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. ...
If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful and aware,
rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's what they do.
Or else, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension
of infinite consciousness. The apex of the heart's release by rejoicing
is the dimension of infinite consciousness, I say, for a mendicant who
has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

And how is the heart's release by equanimity developed? What is its
destination, apex, fruit, and end? It's when a mendicant develops the
heart's release by equanimity together with the awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripen as letting go. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,'
that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive
and the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
staying equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and
the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. Or else, going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. The apex of
the heart's release by equanimity is the dimension of nothingness, I
say, for a mendicant who has not penetrated to a higher freedom."

### N 46.55 With Saṅgārava *Saṅgāravasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why sometimes even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced? And why is it that sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced?"

"Brahmin, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in
sensual desire and you don't truly understand the escape from sensual
desire that has arisen. At that time you don't truly know or see what is
good for yourself, good for another, or good for both. Even hymns that
are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water that was mixed with dye such as red
lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. Even a person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it.

In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire
... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone
those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water that was heated by fire, boiling and
bubbling. Even a person with clear eyes checking their own reflection
wouldn't truly know it or see it.

In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ...
Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those
that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water overgrown with moss and aquatic
plants. Even a person with clear eyes checking their own reflection
wouldn't truly know it or see it.

In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in restlessness and
remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water stirred by the wind, churning,
swirling, and rippling. Even a person with clear eyes checking their own
reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it.

In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in restlessness
and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water that was cloudy, murky, and muddy,
hidden in the darkness. Even a person with clear eyes checking their own
reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it.

In the same way, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in
doubt and you don't truly understand the escape from doubt that has
arisen. At that time you don't truly know or see what is good for
yourself, good for another, or good for both. Even hymns that are
long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced. This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why sometimes
even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those
that are not practiced.

There's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual
desire and you truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has
arisen. At that time you truly know and see what is good for yourself,
good for another, and good for both. Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water that was not mixed with dye such as
red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it.

In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual
desire ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ...
Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced.

Suppose there is a bowl of water that is not heated by a fire, boiling
and bubbling. A person with clear eyes checking their own reflection
would truly know it and see it.

In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will
... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Suppose there is a bowl of water that is not overgrown with moss and
aquatic plants. A person with clear eyes checking their own reflection
would truly know it and see it.

In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness
and drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind,
let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in restlessness
and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Suppose there is a bowl of water that is not stirred by the wind,
churning, swirling, and rippling. A person with clear eyes checking
their own reflection would truly know it and see it.

In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring
to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are
practiced.

Suppose there was a bowl of water that was transparent, clear, and
unclouded, brought into the light. A person with clear eyes checking
their own reflection would truly know it and see it.

In the same way, there's a time when your heart is not overcome and
mired in doubt and you truly understand the escape from doubt that has
arisen. At that time you truly know and see what is good for yourself,
good for another, and good for both. Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.
This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why sometimes even hymns
that are long-unpracticed do spring to mind, let alone those that are
practiced.

These seven awakening factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or
corruptions of the mind. When developed and cultivated they lead to the
realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom. What seven? The
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. These seven awakening
factors are not obstacles, hindrances, or corruptions of the mind. When
developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the fruit of
knowledge and freedom."

When he said this, Saṅgārava said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, worthy Gotama! ... From this day forth, may the worthy
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 46.56 With Prince Abhaya *Abhayasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then Prince
Abhaya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this: 'There is no cause or
reason for not knowing and not seeing. Not knowing and not seeing have
no cause or reason. There is no cause or reason for knowing and seeing.
Knowing and seeing have no cause or reason.' What does the Buddha say
about this?"

"Prince, there are causes and reasons for not knowing and not seeing.
Not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons. There are causes and
reasons for knowing and seeing. Knowing and seeing have causes and
reasons."

"But sir, what is the cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing?
How do not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons?"

"There's a time when the heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire,
without truly knowing and seeing the escape from sensual desire that has
arisen. This is a cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing. And
this is how not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons.

Furthermore, there's a time when the heart is overcome and mired in ill
will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and remorse ... doubt,
without truly knowing and seeing the escape from doubt that has arisen.
This is a cause and reason for not knowing and not seeing. And this is
how not knowing and not seeing have causes and reasons."

"Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"These are called the 'hindrances', prince."

"Indeed, Blessed One, these are hindrances! Indeed, Holy One, these are
hindrances! Overcome by even a single hindrance you wouldn't truly know
or see, let alone all five hindrances.

But sir, what is the cause and reason for knowing and seeing? How do
knowing and seeing have causes and reasons?"

"It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness,
which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as
letting go. They truly know and see with a mind that has developed the
awakening factor of mindfulness. This is a cause and reason for knowing
and seeing. And this is how knowing and seeing have causes and reasons.

Furthermore, a mendicant develops the awakening factor of investigation
of principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ...
equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. They truly know and see with a mind that has
developed the awakening factor of equanimity. This is a cause and reason
for knowing and seeing. And this is how knowing and seeing have causes
and reasons."

"Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"These are called the 'awakening factors', prince."

"Indeed, Blessed One, these are awakening factors! Indeed, Holy One,
these are awakening factors! Endowed with even a single awakening factor
you would truly know and see, let alone all seven awakening factors.
When climbing Mount Vulture's Peak I became fatigued in body and mind.
But this has now faded away. And I've comprehended the teaching."

## The Chapter on Breathing

### N 46.57 A Skeleton *Aṭṭhikamahapphalasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when the perception of a skeleton is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. How so? It's when a
mendicant develops the perception of a skeleton together with the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how the perception of a skeleton, when developed and cultivated, is very
fruitful and beneficial."

"When the perception of a skeleton is developed and cultivated you can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return. How so?..."

"Mendicants, when the perception of a skeleton is developed and
cultivated it leads to great benefit. How so?..."

"Mendicants, when the perception of a skeleton is developed and
cultivated it leads to great sanctuary from the yoke. How so?..."

"Mendicants, when the perception of a skeleton is developed and
cultivated it leads to great inspiration. How so?..."

"Mendicants, when the perception of a skeleton is developed and
cultivated it leads to dwelling in great ease. How so?..."

### N 46.58 Worm-Infested *Puḷavakasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of a worm-infested corpse is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.59 Livid *Vinīlakasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of a livid corpse is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.60 Split Open *Vicchiddakasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of a split open corpse is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.61 Bloated *Uddhumātakasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of a bloated corpse is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.62 Love *Mettāsutta*

"Mendicants, when love is developed and cultivated it's very fruitful
and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.63 Compassion *Karuṇāsutta*

"Mendicants, when compassion is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.64 Rejoicing *Muditāsutta*

"Mendicants, when rejoicing is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.65 Equanimity *Upekkhāsutta*

"Mendicants, when equanimity is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.66 Breathing *Ānāpānasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

## The Chapter on Cessation

### N 46.67 Ugliness *Asubhasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of ugliness is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.68 Death *Maraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of death is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.69 Repulsiveness of Food *Āhārepaṭikūlasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of repulsiveness of food is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.70 Dissatisfaction *Anabhiratisutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world
is developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.71 Impermanence *Aniccasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of impermanence is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.72 Suffering in Impermanence *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of suffering in impermanence is
developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.73 Not-Self in Suffering *Anattasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of not-self in suffering is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.74 Giving Up *Pahānasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of giving up is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.75 Dispassion *Virāgasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of dispassion is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. ..."

### N 46.76 Cessation *Nirodhasutta*

"Mendicants, when the perception of cessation is developed and
cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. How so? It's when a
mendicant develops the perception of cessation together with the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how, when the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated, it's
very fruitful and beneficial.

When the perception of cessation is developed and cultivated you can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return. How so? It's when a mendicant
develops the perception of cessation together with the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. When the perception of
cessation is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect one of
two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something
left over, non-return."

"The perception of cessation, when developed and cultivated, leads to
great benefit ... great sanctuary from the yoke ... great inspiration
... great ease. How so? It's when a mendicant develops the perception of
cessation together with the awakening factors of mindfulness,
investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion,
and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and
ripen as letting go. That's how the perception of cessation, when
developed and cultivated, leads to great benefit ... great sanctuary
from the yoke ... great inspiration ... great ease."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 46.77--88 The Ganges River, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the seven
awakening factors slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the seven awakening factors slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the seven awakening factors
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

**(Tell in full for each of the different rivers as in SN 45.91--102.)**

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 46.89--98 A Realized One, Etc. *Appamādavagga*

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.139--148.)**

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 46.99--110 Hard Work, Etc. *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

"Mendicants, all the hard work that gets done depends on the earth and
is grounded on the earth. ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.149--160.)**

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 46.111--120 Searches, Etc. *Esanāvagga*

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170.)**

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 46.121--129 Floods *Oghādisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four floods. What four? The floods of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, views, and ignorance."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.171--179.)**

### N 46.130 Higher Fetters *Uddhambhāgiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters. The seven awakening factors should be developed for the
direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of
these five higher fetters.

What seven? It's when a mendicant develops the awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity, which culminate in the removal of greed,
hate, and delusion. ..."

"... which culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death ..."

"... which slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment ...

The seven awakening factors should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters."

## Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 46.131--142 More on the Ganges River, Etc. *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.103--114, removal of greed version.)**

## Another Chapter on Diligence

### N 46.143--152 Another Series on a Realized One, Etc. *Punaappamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.139--148, removal of greed version.)**

## Another Chapter on Hard Work

### N 46.153--164 Hard Work, Etc. *Punabalakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.149--160, removal of greed version.)**

## Another Chapter on Searches

### N 46.165--174 Another Series on Searches, Etc. *Punaesanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170.)**

## Another Chapter on Floods

### N 46.175--184 Another Series on Floods, Etc. *Punaoghavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.171--180.)**

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the chapter on removal of greed, hate, and
delusion.)*
:::

::: small
*(The Linked Discourses on Awakening Factors should be told in full just
as the Linked Discourses on the Path.)*
:::

**The Linked Discourses on the Awakening Factors is the second
section.**


# Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation

## The Chapter on Ambapālī the Courtesan

### N 47.1 In Ambapālī's Mango Grove *Ambapālisutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, in Ambapālī's Mango Grove. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to
convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past
sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the
system, and to realize extinguishment. What four?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

### N 47.2 Mindful *Satisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, in
Ambapālī's mango grove. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant should live mindful and aware. This is my
instruction to you.

And how is a mendicant mindful? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a
mendicant is mindful.

And how is a mendicant aware? It's when a mendicant acts with
situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead
and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer
robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when
urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping,
waking, speaking, and keeping silent. That's how a mendicant acts with
situational awareness. A mendicant should live mindful and aware. This
is my instruction to you."

### N 47.3 A Monk *Bhikkhusutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"This is exactly how some silly people ask me for something. But when
the teaching has been explained they think only of following me around."

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy One
teach me the Dhamma in brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of
what the Buddha says! Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's
teaching!"

"Well then, mendicant, you should purify the starting point of skillful
qualities. What is the starting point of skillful qualities? Well
purified ethics and correct view. When your ethics are well purified and
your view is correct, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation in three ways, depending on and grounded on ethics.

What four?

Meditate observing an aspect of the body internally---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Or meditate
observing an aspect of the body externally---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Or meditate observing
an aspect of the body internally and externally---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Or meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally ... externally
... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Or meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally ... externally
... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Or meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ... externally
... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. When you develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation in these three ways, depending on and
grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night."

And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

### N 47.4 At Sālā *Sālasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kosalans near the
brahmin village of Sālā. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, those mendicants who are junior---recently gone forth,
newly come to this teaching and training---should be encouraged,
supported, and established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
What four? Please, reverends, meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in
samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know the body.
Meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, at one, with
minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so
as to truly know feelings. Meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in
samādhi, and unified, so as to truly know the mind.
Meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, at one, with
minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so
as to truly know principles.

Those mendicants who are trainees---who haven't achieved their heart's
desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke---also
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, at one, with
minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, so
as to fully understand the body. They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in
samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand feelings.
They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, at one,
with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and
unified, so as to fully understand the mind. They meditate observing an
aspect of principles---keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear,
immersed in samādhi, and unified, so as to fully understand
principles.

Those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---also meditate
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, at one, with minds that
are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from
the body. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware,
at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in samādhi, and
unified, detached from feelings. They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind---keen, aware, at one, with minds that are clear, immersed in
samādhi, and unified, detached from the mind. They meditate
observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, at one, with minds that
are clear, immersed in samādhi, and unified, detached from
principles.

Those mendicants who are junior---recently gone forth, newly come to
this teaching and training---should be encouraged, supported, and
established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 47.5 A Heap of the Unskillful *Akusalarāsisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha said:

"Rightly speaking, mendicants, you'd call these five hindrances a 'heap
of the unskillful'. For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the
unskillful. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Rightly
speaking, you'd call these five hindrances a 'heap of the unskillful'.
For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful.

Rightly speaking, you'd call these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
a 'heap of the skillful'. For these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are entirely a heap of the skillful. What four? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind ... They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
Rightly speaking, you'd call these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
a 'heap of the skillful'. For these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are entirely a heap of the skillful."

### N 47.6 A Hawk *Sakuṇagghisutta*

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a hawk suddenly swooped down and grabbed
a quail. And as the quail was being carried off he wailed, 'I'm so
unlucky, so unfortunate, to have roamed out of my territory into the
domain of others. If today I'd roamed within my own territory, the
domain of my fathers, this hawk wouldn't have been able to beat me by
fighting.'

'So, quail, what is your own territory, the domain of your fathers?'

'It's a ploughed field covered with clods of earth.'

Confident in her own strength, the hawk was not daunted or intimidated.
She released the quail, saying, 'Go now, quail. But even there you won't
escape me!'

Then the quail went to a ploughed field covered with clods of earth. He
climbed up a big clod, and standing there, he said to the hawk: 'Come
get me, hawk! Come get me, hawk!'

Confident in her own strength, the hawk was not daunted or intimidated.
She folded her wings and suddenly swooped down on the quail. When the
quail knew that the hawk was nearly there, he slipped under that clod.
But the hawk crashed chest-first right there.

That's what happens when you roam out of your territory into the domain
of others.

So, mendicants, don't roam out of your own territory into the domain of
others. If you roam out of your own territory into the domain of others,
Māra will find a vulnerability and get hold of you.

And what is not a mendicant's own territory but the domain of others?
It's the five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by
the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and
arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ...
Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. This is
not a mendicant's own territory but the domain of others.

You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers.
If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers,
Māra won't find a vulnerability or get hold of you.

And what is a mendicant's own territory, the domain of the fathers? It's
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is a mendicant's own territory, the domain of the fathers."

### N 47.7 A Monkey *Makkaṭasutta*

"Mendicants, in the Himalayas there are regions that are rugged and
impassable. In some such regions, neither monkeys nor humans can go,
while in others, monkeys can go but not humans. There are also level,
pleasant places where both monkeys and humans can go. There hunters lay
snares of tar on the monkey trails to catch the monkeys.

The monkeys who are not foolhardy and reckless see the tar and avoid it
from afar. But a foolish and reckless monkey goes up to the tar and
grabs it with a hand. He gets stuck there. Thinking to free his hand, he
grabs it with his other hand. He gets stuck there. Thinking to free both
hands, he grabs it with a foot. He gets stuck there. Thinking to free
both hands and foot, he grabs it with his other foot. He gets stuck
there. Thinking to free both hands and feet, he grabs it with his snout.
He gets stuck there.

And so the monkey, trapped at five points, just lies there screeching.
He'd meet with tragedy and disaster, and the hunter can do what he wants
with him. The hunter spears him, pries him off that tarred block of
wood, and goes wherever he wants.

That's what happens when you roam out of your territory into the domain
of others.

So, mendicants, don't roam out of your own territory into the domain of
others. If you roam out of your own territory into the domain of others,
Māra will find a vulnerability and get hold of you.

And what is not a mendicant's own territory but the domain of others?
It's the five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five? Sights known by
the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and
arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ...
Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. This is
not a mendicant's own territory but the domain of others.

You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers.
If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your fathers,
Māra won't find a vulnerability or get hold of you.

And what is a mendicant's own territory, the domain of the fathers? It's
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is a mendicant's own territory, the domain of the fathers."

### N 47.8 Cooks *Sūdasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a foolish, incompetent, unskillful cook was to
serve a ruler or their chief minister with an extravagant variety of
curries: superbly sour, bitter, pungent, and sweet; hot and mild, and
salty and bland.

But that cook didn't take their master's hint: 'Today my master
preferred this sauce, or he reached for it, or he took a lot of it, or
he praised it. Today my master preferred the sour or bitter or pungent
or sweet or hot or mild or salty sauce. Or he preferred the bland sauce,
or he reached for the bland one, or he took a lot of it, or he praised
it.'

That foolish, incompetent, unskillful cook doesn't get presented with
clothes, wages, or bonuses. Why is that? Because they don't take their
master's hint.

In the same way, a foolish, incompetent, unskillful mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they meditate observing
an aspect of the body, their mind doesn't enter immersion, and their
corruptions aren't given up. But they don't take the hint. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they
meditate observing an aspect of principles, the mind doesn't enter
immersion, and the corruptions aren't given up. But they don't take the
hint.

That foolish, incompetent, unskillful mendicant doesn't get blissful
meditations in this very life, nor do they get mindfulness and
situational awareness. Why is that? Because they don't take their mind's
hint.

Suppose an astute, competent, skillful cook was to serve a ruler or
their chief minister with an extravagant variety of curries: superbly
sour, bitter, pungent, and sweet; hot and mild, and salty and bland.

And that cook took their master's hint: 'Today my master preferred this
sauce, or he reached for it, or he took a lot of it, or he praised it.
Today my master preferred the sour or bitter or pungent or sweet or hot
or mild or salty sauce. Or he preferred the bland sauce, or he reached
for the bland one, or he took a lot of it, or he praised it.'

That astute, competent, skillful cook gets presented with clothes,
wages, and bonuses. Why is that? Because they take their master's hint.

In the same way, an astute, competent, skillful mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they meditate observing
an aspect of the body, their mind enters immersion, and their
corruptions are given up. They take the hint. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they meditate
observing an aspect of principles, their mind enters immersion, and
their corruptions are given up. They take the hint.

That astute, competent, skillful mendicant gets blissful meditations in
this very life, and they get mindfulness and situational awareness. Why
is that? Because they take their mind's hint."

### N 47.9 Sick *Gilānasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the little village of Beluva. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, please enter the rainy season
residence with whatever friends or acquaintances you have around
Vesālī. I'll commence the rainy season residence right here
in the little village of Beluva."

"Yes, sir," those mendicants replied. They did as the Buddha said, while
the Buddha commenced the rainy season residence right there in the
little village of Beluva.

After the Buddha had commenced the rainy season residence, he fell
severely ill, struck by dreadful pains, close to death. But he endured
unbothered, with mindfulness and situational awareness. Then it occurred
to the Buddha:

"It would not be appropriate for me to be fully extinguished before
informing my attendants and taking leave of the mendicant
Saṅgha. Why don't I forcefully suppress this illness,
stabilize the life force, and live on?" So that is what he did. Then the
Buddha's illness died down.

Soon after the Buddha had recovered from that sickness, he left his
dwelling and sat in the shade of the porch on the seat spread out. Then
Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, it's fantastic that the Buddha is comfortable, that he's keeping
well, and that he's getting by. Because when the Buddha was sick, my
body felt like it was drugged. I was disorientated, and the teachings
didn't spring to mind. Still, at least I was consoled by the thought
that the Buddha won't be fully extinguished without bringing something
up regarding the Saṅgha of mendicants."

"But what could the mendicant Saṅgha expect from me now,
Ānanda? I've taught the Dhamma without making any distinction between
secret and public teachings. The Realized One doesn't have the closed
fist of a tutor when it comes to the teachings.

If there's anyone who thinks: 'I shall lead the mendicant
Saṅgha,' or 'the Saṅgha of mendicants is meant
for me,' let them bring something up regarding the Saṅgha.
But the Realized One doesn't think like this, so why should he bring
something up regarding the Saṅgha?

Now I am old, elderly and senior. I'm advanced in years and have reached
the final stage of life. I'm currently eighty years old. Just as a
decrepit old cart keeps going by relying on straps, in the same way, the
Realized One's body keeps going as if it were relying on straps.

Sometimes the Realized One, not focusing on any signs, and with the
cessation of certain feelings, enters and remains in the signless
immersion of the heart. Only then does the Realized One's body become
more comfortable.

So Ānanda, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.

And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a
mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no other
refuge. That's how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with
no other refuge.

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own
island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as
their island and their refuge, with no other refuge---those mendicants
of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best."

### N 47.10 The Nuns' Quarters *Bhikkhunupassayasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the nuns' quarters, and sat down on the seat spread out.
Then several nuns went up to Venerable Ānanda bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Honorable Ānanda, several nuns meditate with their minds firmly
established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. They have
realized a higher distinction than they had before."

"That's how it is, sisters! That's how it is, sisters! Any monk or nun
who meditates with their mind firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation can expect to realize a higher distinction than
they had before."

Then Ānanda educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired those nuns with
a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and left. Then Ānanda
wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his
return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"That's so true, Ānanda! That's so true! Any monk or nun who meditates
with their mind firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation can expect to realize a higher distinction than they had
before.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. As they meditate observing an aspect of the body, based on
the body there arises physical tension, or mental sluggishness, or the
mind is externally scattered. That mendicant should direct their mind
towards an inspiring subject as a basis for meditation. As they do so,
joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full
of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one
feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi. Then they reflect: 'I have accomplished the goal
for which I directed my mind. Let me now pull back.' They pull back, and
neither place the mind nor keep it connected. They understand: 'I'm
neither placing the mind nor keeping it connected. Mindful within
myself, I'm happy.'

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. As they meditate observing an aspect of
principles, based on principles there arises physical tension, or mental
sluggishness, or the mind is externally scattered. That mendicant should
direct their mind towards an inspiring subject as a basis for
meditation. As they do so, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed in samādhi. Then they reflect: 'I have
accomplished the goal for which I directed my mind. Let me now pull
back.' They pull back, and neither place the mind nor keep it connected.
They understand: 'I'm neither placing the mind nor keeping it connected.
Mindful within myself, I'm happy.' That's how there is directed
development.

And how is there undirected development? Not directing their mind
externally, a mendicant understands: 'My mind is not directed
externally.' And they understand: 'Before and behind, it's
unconstricted, freed, and undirected.' And they also understand: 'I
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, mindful; I am
happy.' Not directing their mind externally, a mendicant understands:
'My mind is not directed externally.' And they understand: 'Before and
behind, it's unconstricted, freed, and undirected.' And they also
understand: 'I meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware,
mindful; I am happy.' Not directing their mind externally, a mendicant
understands: 'My mind is not directed externally.' And they understand:
'Before and behind, it's unconstricted, freed, and undirected.' And they
also understand: 'I meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, mindful; I am happy.' Not directing their mind externally, a
mendicant understands: 'My mind is not directed externally.' And they
understand: 'Before and behind, it's unconstricted, freed, and
undirected.' And they also understand: 'I meditate observing an aspect
of principles---keen, aware, mindful; I am happy.' That's how there is
undirected development.

So, Ānanda, I've taught you directed development and undirected
development. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who
wants what's best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees,
and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, Ānanda! Don't be
negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

## The Chapter at Nālandā

### N 47.11 A Great Man *Mahāpurisasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'a great man'. How is a great man defined?"

"Sāriputta, someone whose mind is free is a great man, I
say. If their mind is not free, I say they're not a great man.

And how does someone have a free mind? It's when a mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they meditate observing
an aspect of the body, their mind becomes dispassionate, and is freed
from the defilements by not grasping. They meditate observing an aspect
of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they meditate observing
an aspect of principles, their mind becomes dispassionate, and is freed
from the defilements by not grasping. That's how someone has a free
mind.

Someone whose mind is free is a great man, I say. If their mind is not
free, I say they're not a great man."

### N 47.12 At Nāḷandā *Nālandasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove. Then Sāriputta went up
to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have such confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no
other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, Sāriputta. You've
roared a definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such
confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or
brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is
superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, Sāriputta, given that you don't comprehend the
minds of Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing,
making such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the teaching. Suppose
there was a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and intelligent. He keeps strangers out and lets
known people in. As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn't see a
hole or cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip
out. He thinks, 'Whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel,
all of them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'"

"Good, good, Sāriputta! So Sāriputta, you
should frequently speak this exposition of the teaching to the monks,
nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Though there will be some silly people who
have doubt or uncertainty regarding the Realized One, when they hear
this exposition of the teaching they'll give up that doubt or
uncertainty."

### N 47.13 With Cunda *Cundasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. At that time Venerable
Sāriputta was staying in the Magadhan lands near the little
village of Nālaka, and he was sick, suffering, gravely ill.
And the novice Cunda was his carer.

Then Venerable Sāriputta was fully extinguished from that
sickness. Then Cunda took Sāriputta's bowl and robes and
set out for Sāvatthī. He went to see Venerable Ānanda at
Jeta's grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Sāriputta has become fully quenched. This
is his bowl and robe."

"Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this matter. Come, let's
go to the Buddha and inform him about this."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda.

Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, this novice Cunda says that Venerable Sāriputta has
become fully quenched. This is his bowl and robe. Since I heard this, my
body feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, and the teachings don't
spring to mind."

"Well, Ānanda, when Sāriputta was fully quenched, did he
take away your entire spectrum of ethical conduct, of immersion, of
wisdom, of freedom, or of the knowledge and vision of freedom?"

"No, sir, he did not. But Venerable Sāriputta was my
adviser and counselor. He educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired
me. He never tired of teaching the Dhamma, and he supported his
spiritual companions. I remember the nectar of the teaching, the riches
of the teaching, the support of the teaching given by Venerable
Sāriputta."

"Ānanda, did I not prepare for this when I explained that we must be
parted and separated from all we hold dear and beloved? How could it
possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to
wear out should not wear out? That is not possible.

Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood, and the largest
branch fell off. In the same way, in the great Saṅgha that
stands with heartwood, Sāriputta has become fully quenched.

How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and
liable to wear out should not wear out? That is not possible.

So Ānanda, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.

And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

That's how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with
no other refuge. That's how the teaching is their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own
island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as
their island and their refuge, with no other refuge---those mendicants
of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best."

### N 47.14 At Ukkacelā *Ukkacelasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis near
Ukkacelā on the bank of the Ganges river, together with a
large Saṅgha of mendicants. It was not long after
Sāriputta and Moggallāna had become fully
quenched. Now, at that time the Buddha was sitting in the open,
surrounded by the Saṅgha of mendicants.

Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of mendicants, who
were silent. He addressed them:

"Mendicants, this assembly seems empty to me now that
Sāriputta and Moggallāna have become fully
quenched. When Sāriputta and Moggallāna were
alive, my assembly was never empty; I had no concern for any region
where they stayed. The Buddhas of the past or the future have pairs of
chief disciples who are no better than Sāriputta and
Moggallāna were to me.

It's an incredible and amazing quality of such disciples that they
fulfill the Teacher's instructions and follow his advice. And they're
liked and approved, respected and admired by the four assemblies.

And it's an incredible and amazing quality of the Realized One that when
such a pair of disciples becomes fully quenched he does not sorrow or
lament. How could it possibly be so that what is born, created,
conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out? That is not
possible.

Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood, and the largest
branches fell off. In the same way, in the great Saṅgha
that stands with heartwood, Sāriputta and
Moggallāna have become fully quenched.

How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and
liable to wear out should not wear out? That is not possible.

So mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.

And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

That's how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with
no other refuge. That's how the teaching is their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own
island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as
their island and their refuge, with no other refuge---those mendicants
of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best."

### N 47.15 With Bāhiya *Bāhiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Bāhiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well then, Bāhiya, you should purify the starting point of
skillful qualities. What is the starting point of skillful qualities?
Well purified ethics and correct view. When your ethics are well
purified and your view is correct, you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics.

What four? Meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. When you
develop these four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and
grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in skillful
qualities, whether by day or by night."

And then Venerable Bāhiya approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. Then
Bāhiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Bāhiya became one of the
perfected.

### N 47.16 With Uttiya *Uttiyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Uttiya went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may
the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll
live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well then, Uttiya, you should purify the starting point of skillful
qualities. What is the starting point of skillful qualities? Well
purified ethics and correct view. When your ethics are well purified and
your view is correct, you should develop the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, depending on and grounded on ethics.

What four? Meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. When you
develop these four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and
grounded on ethics, you'll pass beyond Death's dominion."

And then Venerable Uttiya approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving. Then Uttiya, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme end
of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having achieved with
his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the
lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Uttiya became one of the perfected.

### N 47.17 Noble *Ariyasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are
developed and cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one
who practices them to the complete ending of suffering. What four?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

When these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering."

### N 47.18 Divinity *Brahmasutta*

At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the
Nerañjarā River.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "The
four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They
are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying,
to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to
realize extinguishment.

What four? A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. Or they'd meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... or
mind ... or principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. The four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment."

Then the divinity Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily
as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from
the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha. He arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said:

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! Sir, the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in
order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make
an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize
extinguishment.

What four? A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. Or they'd meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... or
mind ... or principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. The four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment."

That's what the divinity Sahampati said. Then he went on to say:

> "The compassionate one,\
> \>who sees the ending of rebirth,\
> understands the path to convergence.\
> By this path people crossed over before,\
> will cross, and are crossing."

### N 47.19 At Sedaka *Sedakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the
town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a pole acrobat of the corpse-workers set
up the bamboo pole of his tribe and said to his apprentice
Medakathālikā, 'Come now, dear Medakathālikā,
climb up the bamboo pole and stand on my shoulders.'

'Yes, tutor,' she replied. She climbed up the bamboo pole and stood on
her tutor's shoulders.

Then the pole acrobat of the corpse-workers said to
Medakathālikā, 'You look after me, dear
Medakathālikā, and I'll look after you. That's how,
guarding and looking after each other, we'll display our skill, collect
our fee, and get down safely from the bamboo pole.'

When he said this, Medakathālikā said to her teacher,
'That's not how it is, tutor! You should look after yourself, and I'll
look after myself. That's how, guarding and looking after ourselves,
we'll display our skill, collect our fee, and get down safely from the
bamboo pole.'

That's the way," said the Buddha. "It's just as
Medakathālikā said to her tutor. Thinking 'I'll look after
myself,' you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. Thinking 'I'll
look after others,' you should cultivate mindfulness meditation. Looking
after yourself, you look after others; and looking after others, you
look after yourself.

And how do you look after others by looking after yourself? By
development, cultivation, and practice of meditation. And how do you
look after yourself by looking after others? By acceptance,
harmlessness, love, and sympathy.

Thinking 'I'll look after myself,' you should cultivate mindfulness
meditation. Thinking 'I'll look after others,' you should cultivate
mindfulness meditation. Looking after yourself, you look after others;
and looking after others, you look after yourself."

### N 47.20 The Finest Lady in the Land *Janapadakalyāṇīsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas called Sedaka. There
the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, suppose that on hearing, 'The finest lady in the land! The
finest lady in the land!' a large crowd would gather. And the finest
lady in the land would dance and sing in a most thrilling way. On
hearing, 'The finest lady in the land is dancing and singing! The finest
lady in the land is dancing and singing!' an even larger crowd would
gather.

Then a person would come along who wants to live and doesn't want to
die, who wants to be happy and recoils from pain. They'd say to him,
'Worthy man, this is a bowl full to the brim with oil. You must carry it
in between this large crowd and the finest lady in the land. And a man
with a drawn sword will follow right behind you. Wherever you spill even
a drop, he'll chop off your head right there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Would that person lose focus on that
bowl, and negligently get distracted outside?"

"No, sir."

"I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is what it means. 'A
bowl of oil filled to the brim' is a term for mindfulness of the body.

So you should train like this: 'We will develop mindfulness of the body.
We'll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up,
consolidate it, and properly implement it.' That's how you should
train."

## The Chapter on Ethics and Duration

### N 47.21 Ethics *Sīlasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the venerables Ānanda and
Bhadda were staying near Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken
Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, the Buddha has spoken of skillful ethics. What's their
purpose?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'The Buddha has
spoken of skillful ethics. What's their purpose?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"The Buddha has spoken of skillful ethics to the extent necessary for
developing the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. The Buddha has spoken of skillful ethics to
the extent necessary for developing the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

### N 47.22 Long Lasting *Ciraṭṭhitisutta*

The same setting.

"What is the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true
teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One? What is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'What is the cause,
Reverend Ānanda, what is the reason why the true teaching does not last
long after the final quenching of the Realized One? What is the cause,
what is the reason why the true teaching does last long after the final
quenching of the Realized One?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"It's because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn't last long after
the final quenching of the Realized One. It's because of developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true
teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. It's because of not developing and
cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true
teaching doesn't last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One. It's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the
final quenching of the Realized One."

### N 47.23 Decline *Parihānasutta*

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Bhadda were staying near
Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken Monastery. Then in the late
afternoon, Venerable Bhadda came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to Ānanda:

"What's the cause, Reverend Ānanda, what's the reason why the true
teaching declines? And what's the cause, what's the reason why the true
teaching doesn't decline?"

"Good, good, Reverend Bhadda! Your approach and articulation are
excellent, and it's a good question. For you asked: 'What's the cause,
what's the reason why the true teaching declines? And what's the cause,
what's the reason why the true teaching doesn't decline?'"

"Yes, reverend."

"It's because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that the true teaching declines. It's because of
developing and cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that
the true teaching doesn't decline.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. It's because of not developing and
cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true
teaching declines. And it's because of developing and cultivating these
four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn't
decline."

### N 47.24 Plain Version *Suddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What
four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

These are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 47.25 A Certain Brahmin *Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why the true
teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One? And what is the cause, what is the reason why the true teaching
does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Brahmin, it's because of not developing and cultivating the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation that the true teaching doesn't last long after
the final quenching of the Realized One. It's because of developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true
teaching does last long after the final quenching of the Realized One.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. It's because of not developing and
cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation that the true
teaching doesn't last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One. It's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that the true teaching does last long after the
final quenching of the Realized One."

When he said this, the brahmin said to the Buddha, "Excellent, worthy
Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 47.26 Partly *Padesasutta*

At one time the venerables Sāriputta,
Mahāmoggallāna, and Anuruddha were staying near
Sāketa, in the Thorny Wood. Then in the late afternoon,
Sāriputta and Mahāmoggallāna came out of
retreat, went to Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side.
Sāriputta said to Anuruddha:

"Reverend, they speak of this person called 'a trainee'. How is a
trainee defined?"

"Reverends, a trainee is someone who has partly developed the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. A trainee is someone who has partly developed
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 47.27 Completely *Samattasutta*

The same setting.

"Reverend, they speak of this person called 'an adept'. How is an adept
defined?"

"Reverends, an adept is someone who has completely developed the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. An adept is someone who has completely
developed the four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 47.28 The World *Lokasutta*

The same setting. "Reverend Anuruddha, what things have you developed
and cultivated to attain great direct knowledge?"

"Reverend, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

What four? It's when I meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I
attained great direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four
kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I directly know the thousandfold galaxy."

### N 47.29 With Sirivaḍḍha *Sirivaḍḍhasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Rājagaha, in
the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time the
householder Sirivaḍḍha was sick, suffering, gravely ill.
Then he addressed a man:

"Please, worthy man, go to Venerable Ānanda, and in my name bow with
your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the householder
Sirivaḍḍha is sick, suffering, gravely ill. He bows with
his head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please visit him at his home
out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Sirivaḍḍha asked.
Ānanda consented with silence.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of the householder Sirivaḍḍha, sat
down on the seat spread out, and said to him:

"I hope you're keeping well, householder; I hope you're all right. And I
hope the pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not
its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"So you should train like this: 'I'll meditate observing an aspect of
the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the world. I'll meditate on an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.' That's how you should train."

"These four kinds of mindfulness meditation that were taught by the
Buddha are found in me, and I exhibit them. For I meditate observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. I meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. And of the five lower fetters taught by
the Buddha, I don't see any that I haven't given up."

"You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate! You have declared the
fruit of non-return."

### N 47.30 With Mānadinna *Mānadinnasutta*

The same setting. Now at that time the householder
Mānadinna was sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then he
addressed a man:

"Please, worthy man, go to Venerable Ānanda ..." ...

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading. When I
experience such painful feelings I meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. I meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. And of the five lower fetters taught by the
Buddha, I don't see any that I haven't given up."

"You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate! You have declared the
fruit of non-return."

## The Chapter on Not Learned From Anyone Else

### N 47.31 Not Learned From Anyone Else *Ananussutasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"'This is the observation of an aspect of the body.' Such, mendicants,
was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in
me regarding teachings not learned before from another. 'This
observation of an aspect of the body should be developed.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of the body has been developed.' Such was the
vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me
regarding teachings not learned before from another.

'This is the observation of an aspect of feelings.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of feelings should be developed.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of feelings has been developed.' ...

'This is the observation of an aspect of the mind.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of the mind should be developed.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of the mind has been developed.' ...

'This is the observation of an aspect of principles.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of principles should be developed.' ... 'This
observation of an aspect of principles has been developed.' Such was the
vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me
regarding teachings not learned before from another."

### N 47.32 Fading Away *Virāgasutta*

"Mendicants, these four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed
and cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

These four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed and
cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

### N 47.33 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of
suffering. Whoever has undertaken the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation has undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of
suffering.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

### N 47.34 Developed *Bhāvitasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are
developed and cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the
far shore.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

When these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are developed and
cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore."

### N 47.35 Mindful *Satisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, a mendicant should live mindful and aware. This is my
instruction to you.

And how is a mendicant mindful? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a
mendicant is mindful.

And how is a mendicant aware? It's when a mendicant knows feelings as
they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as
they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. They know perceptions
as they arise, as they remain, and as they go away. That's how a
mendicant is aware. A mendicant should live mindful and aware. This is
my instruction to you."

### N 47.36 Enlightenment *Aññāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What
four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. These are the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.

Because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, one of two results can be expected: enlightenment in this
very life, or if there's something left over, non-return."

### N 47.37 Desire *Chandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What
four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. As they do so they give up desire for the body. When desire
is given up they realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they give up desire for feelings. When desire is given up they
realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they give up desire for the mind. When desire is given up they
realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they give up desire for principles. When desire is given up they
realize freedom from death."

### N 47.38 Complete Understanding *Pariññātasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What
four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. As they do so they completely understand the body. When the
body is completely understood they realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they completely understand feelings. When feelings are completely
understood they realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they completely understand the mind. When the mind is completely
understood they realize freedom from death.

They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. As they do
so they completely understand principles. When principles are completely
understood they realize freedom from death."

### N 47.39 Development *Bhāvanāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the development of the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. Listen ...

And what is the development of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation?
It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

This is the development of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 47.40 Analysis *Vibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you mindfulness meditation, the development of
mindfulness meditation, and the practice that leads to the development
of mindfulness meditation. Listen ...

And what is mindfulness meditation? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. This is called
mindfulness meditation.

And what is the development of mindfulness meditation? It's when a
mendicant meditates observing the body as liable to originate, as liable
to vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They observe
feelings ... mind ... principles as liable to originate, as liable to
vanish, and as liable to originate and vanish---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. This is
called the development of mindfulness meditation.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness
meditation? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation."

## The Chapter on Freedom From Death

### N 47.41 Freedom From Death *Amatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should meditate with your mind firmly established in
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. Don't let freedom from death
escape you. What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. You should meditate with your mind firmly
established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. Don't let
freedom from death escape you."

### N 47.42 Origin *Samudayasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the origin and the ending of the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. Listen ...

And what is the origin of the body? The body originates from food. When
food ceases, the body ends.

Feelings originate from contact. When contact ceases, feelings end.

The mind originates from name and form. When name and form cease, the
mind ends.

Principles originate from application of mind. When application of mind
ends, principles end."

### N 47.43 The Path *Maggasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, this one time,
when I was first awakened, I was staying in Uruvelā at the
goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River.
As I was in private retreat this thought came to mind: 'The four kinds
of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order
to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end
of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize
extinguishment.

What four? A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. Or they'd meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... or
mind ... or principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. The four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.'

And then the divinity Sahampati, knowing my train of thought, as easily
as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the
realm of divinity and reappeared in front of me. He arranged his robe
over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:
'That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! Sir, the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in
order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make
an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize
extinguishment.

What four? A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. Or they'd meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... or
mind ... or principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. The four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.'

That's what the divinity Sahampati said. Then he went on to say:

> "The compassionate one,\
> \>who sees the ending of rebirth,\
> understands the path to convergence.\
> By this path people crossed over before,\
> will cross over, and are crossing over.'"

### N 47.44 Mindful *Satisutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant should live mindfully. This is my instruction
to you.

And how is a mendicant mindful? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a
mendicant is mindful. A mendicant should live mindfully. This is my
instruction to you."

### N 47.45 A Heap of the Skillful *Kusalarāsisutta*

"Rightly speaking, mendicants, you'd call these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation a 'heap of the skillful'. For these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation are entirely a heap of the skillful.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

Rightly speaking, you'd call these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
a 'heap of the skillful'. For these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
are entirely a heap of the skillful."

### N 47.46 Restraint in the Monastic Code *Pātimokkhasaṁvarasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well then, mendicant, you should purify the starting point of skillful
qualities. What is the starting point of skillful qualities? Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourself well and resorting
for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep
the rules you've undertaken. When you've done this, you should develop
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on
ethics.

What four? Meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

When you develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way,
depending on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline,
in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

### N 47.47 Bad Conduct *Duccaritasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well then, mendicant, you should purify the starting point of skillful
qualities. What is the beginning of skillful qualities? Give up bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind and develop good conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind. When you've done this, you should develop the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation, depending on and grounded on
ethics.

What four? Meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. When you
develop the four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way, depending
on and grounded on ethics, you can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night." ...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

### N 47.48 Friends *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, those for whom you have sympathy, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in the development of the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

Those for whom you have sympathy, and those worth listening to---friends
and colleagues, relatives and family---should be encouraged, supported,
and established in the development of the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

### N 47.49 Feelings *Vedanāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three feelings. What three? Pleasant,
painful, and neutral feeling. These are the three feelings. The four
kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed to completely
understand these three feelings.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

These four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed to
completely understand these three feelings."

### N 47.50 Defilements *Āsavasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three defilements. What three? The
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are
the three defilements.

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed to give up
these three defilements.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

These four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed to give
up these three defilements."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 47.51--62 Twelve Discourses on the Ganges River, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation slants, slopes, and inclines to
extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 47.63--72 The Realized One *Appamādavagga*

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 47.73--84 Hard Work, Etc. *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

"Mendicants, all the hard work that gets done depends on the earth and
is grounded on the earth. ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 47.85--94 Searches, Etc. *Esanāvagga*

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. ..."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 47.95--104 Higher Fetters, Etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the
direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of
these five higher fetters.

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

These four kinds of mindfulness meditation should be developed for the
direct knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of
these five higher fetters."

::: small
*(The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation should be told in full
as in the Linked Discourses on the Path. These ten discourses correspond
to SN 45.171--179, with the above as the final discourse.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::

**The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness Meditation is the third section.**

# Linked Discourses on the Faculties

## The Chapter on the Plain Version

### N 48.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha said:

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties."

### N 48.2 A Stream-Enterer (1st) *Paṭhamasotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' gratification, drawback,
and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 48.3 A Stream-Enterer (2nd) *Dutiyasotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

### N 48.4 A Perfected One (1st) *Paṭhamaarahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five
faculties' gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a mendicant is
called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the
spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

### N 48.5 A Perfected One (2nd) *Dutiyaarahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A mendicant comes to
be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a mendicant is
called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the
spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

### N 48.6 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the
gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the
gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

### N 48.7 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
faculty of faith, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads
to its cessation. They don't understand the faculty of energy ...
mindfulness ... immersion ... wisdom, its origin, its cessation, and the
practice that leads to its cessation. I don't deem them as true ascetics
and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the goal of life as an
ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it with their own
insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of faith,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They do understand the faculty of energy ... mindfulness ... immersion
... wisdom, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live
having realized it with their own insight."

### N 48.8 Should Be Seen *Daṭṭhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the faculty of faith be seen? In the four factors of
stream-entry.

And where should the faculty of energy be seen? In the four right
efforts.

And where should the faculty of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation.

And where should the faculty of immersion be seen? In the four
absorptions.

And where should the faculty of wisdom be seen? In the four noble
truths.

These are the five faculties."

### N 48.9 Analysis (1st) *Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the
faculty of energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the faculty
of mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This
is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

### N 48.10 Analysis (2nd) *Dutiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. They generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
the faculty of energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. They meditate observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. This is called the faculty of
mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. This is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. They truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called the faculty of
wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

## The Chapter on Weaker

### N 48.11 Gain *Paṭilābhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? The energy that's gained in
connection with the four right efforts. This is called the faculty of
energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? The mindfulness that's gained in
connection with the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. This is called
the faculty of mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This
is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

### N 48.12 In Brief (1st) *Paṭhamasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner. If
they are weaker still, they're a once-returner. If they are weaker
still, they're a stream-enterer. If they're weaker still, they're a
follower of teachings. If they're weaker still, they're a follower by
faith."

### N 48.13 In Brief (2nd) *Dutiyasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner ...
a once-returner ... a stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a
follower by faith.

So from a diversity of faculties there's a diversity of fruits. And from
a diversity of fruits there's a diversity of persons."

### N 48.14 In Brief (3rd) *Tatiyasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner ...
a once-returner ... a stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a
follower by faith.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These five faculties are not a waste,
I say."

### N 48.15 In Detail (1st) *Paṭhamavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith."

### N 48.16 In Detail (2nd) *Dutiyavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith.

So from a diversity of faculties there's a diversity of fruits. And from
a diversity of fruits there's a diversity of persons."

### N 48.17 In Detail (3rd) *Tatiyavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith.

So, mendicants, if you practice fully you succeed fully. If you practice
partially you succeed partially. These five faculties are not a waste, I
say."

### N 48.18 Practicing *Paṭipannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're practicing to
realize the fruit of perfection ... a non-returner ... practicing to
realize the fruit of non-return ... a once-returner ... practicing to
realize the fruit of once-return ... a stream-enterer ... practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. Someone who totally and utterly lacks
these five faculties is an outsider who belongs with the ordinary
persons, I say."

### N 48.19 Endowed *Sampannasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of someone who is 'accomplished regarding the
faculties'. How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties
defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom that lead to peace and
awakening. This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the
faculties is defined."

### N 48.20 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

It's because of developing and cultivating these five faculties that a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

## The Chapter on the Six Faculties

### N 48.21 Future Lives *Punabbhavasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. As long as I didn't
truly understand these five faculties' gratification, drawback, and
escape, I didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world
with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these five faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 48.22 The Life Faculty *Jīvitindriyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three faculties. What three? The faculties
of femininity, masculinity, and life. These are the three faculties."

### N 48.23 The Faculty of Enlightenment *Aññindriyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three faculties. What three? The faculty of
understanding that one's enlightenment is imminent. The faculty of
enlightenment. The faculty of one who is enlightened. These are the
three faculties."

### N 48.24 A One-Seeder *Ekabījīsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a one-seeder
... one who goes from family to family ... one who has seven rebirths at
most ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith."

### N 48.25 Plain Version *Suddhakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. These are the six
faculties."

### N 48.26 A Stream-Enterer *Sotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. A noble disciple comes to
truly understand these six faculties' origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a stream-enterer,
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 48.27 A Perfected One *Arahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. A mendicant comes to be
freed by not grasping after truly understanding these six faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.

Such a mendicant is called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who
has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down
the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

### N 48.28 Awakened *Sambuddhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

As long as I didn't truly understand these six faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in
this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these six faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 48.29 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

### N 48.30 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
eye faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. They don't understand the ear faculty ... nose faculty
... tongue faculty ... body faculty ... mind faculty, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I don't deem
them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the
goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it
with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the eye faculty, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They understand the ear faculty ... nose faculty ... tongue faculty ...
body faculty ... mind faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the
practice that leads to its cessation. I deem them as true ascetics and
brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight."

## The Chapter on the Pleasure Faculty

### N 48.31 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. These are the five
faculties."

### N 48.32 A Stream-Enterer *Sotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

### N 48.33 A Perfected One *Arahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. A mendicant comes to
be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.

Such a mendicant is called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who
has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down
the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

### N 48.34 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

### N 48.35 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
faculty of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that
leads to its cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who don't
understand the faculty of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having
realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of
pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty
of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I deem them as
true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own
insight."

### N 48.36 Analysis (1st) *Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

These are the five faculties."

### N 48.37 Analysis (2nd) *Dutiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

In this context, the faculties of pleasure and happiness should be seen
as pleasant feeling. The faculties of pain and sadness should be seen as
painful feeling. The faculty of equanimity should be seen as neutral
feeling.

These are the five faculties."

### N 48.38 Analysis (3rd) *Tatiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

In this context, the faculties of pleasure and happiness should be seen
as pleasant feeling. The faculties of pain and sadness should be seen as
painful feeling. The faculty of equanimity should be seen as neutral
feeling.

That's how these five faculties, depending on how they're explained,
having been five become three, and having been three become five."

### N 48.39 The Simile of the Fire Sticks *Kaṭṭhopamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

The faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you understand: 'I'm in a
state of pleasure.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced
as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure
ceases and stops.

The faculty of pain arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as
painful. When in a state of pain, you understand: 'I'm in a state of
pain.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful,
you understand that the corresponding faculty of pain ceases and stops.

The faculty of happiness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as happiness. When in a state of happiness, you understand: 'I'm in a
state of happiness.' With the cessation of that contact to be
experienced as happiness, you understand that the corresponding faculty
of happiness ceases and stops.

The faculty of sadness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as sadness. When in a state of sadness, you understand: 'I'm in a state
of sadness.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as
sadness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of sadness ceases
and stops.

The faculty of equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as equanimous. When in a state of equanimity, you
understand: 'I'm in a state of equanimity.' With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the
corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops.

When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is
produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any
corresponding heat ceases and stops.

In the same way, the faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact
to be experienced as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you
understand: 'I'm in a state of pleasure.' With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the
corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops.

The faculty of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. When in a state
of equanimity, you understand: 'I'm in a state of equanimity.' With the
cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you
understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and
stops."

### N 48.40 Irregular Order *Uppaṭipāṭikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pain, sadness, pleasure, happiness, and equanimity.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of pain arises. They understand: 'The faculty of pain has arisen
in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason. It's
not possible for the faculty of pain to arise without a basis, a source,
a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty of pain, its
origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of pain that's arisen
ceases without anything left over. And where does that faculty of pain
that's arisen cease without anything left over? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. That's where the faculty of pain that's arisen ceases
without anything left over. They're called a mendicant who understands
the cessation of the faculty of pain, and who applies their mind to that
end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of sadness arises. They understand: 'The faculty of sadness has
arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.
It's not possible for the faculty of sadness to arise without a basis, a
source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty of
sadness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of sadness
that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where does that
faculty of sadness that's arisen cease without anything left over? It's
when, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a
mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's where the
faculty of sadness that's arisen ceases without anything left over.
They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty
of sadness, and who applies their mind to that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of pleasure arises. They understand: 'The faculty of pleasure
has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a
reason. It's not possible for the faculty of pleasure to arise without a
basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty
of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of
pleasure that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where does
that faculty of pleasure that's arisen cease without anything left over?
It's when, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' That's
where the faculty of pleasure that's arisen ceases without anything left
over. They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the
faculty of pleasure, and who applies their mind to that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of happiness arises. They understand: 'The faculty of happiness
has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a
reason. It's not possible for the faculty of happiness to arise without
a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the
faculty of happiness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty
of happiness that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where
does that faculty of happiness that's arisen cease without anything left
over? It's when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. That's where the faculty of happiness that's arisen ceases
without anything left over. They're called a mendicant who understands
the cessation of the faculty of happiness, and who applies their mind to
that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of equanimity arises. They understand: 'The faculty of
equanimity has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a
condition, and a reason. It's not possible for the faculty of equanimity
to arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They
understand the faculty of equanimity, its origin, its cessation, and
where that faculty of equanimity that's arisen ceases without anything
left over. And where does that faculty of equanimity that's arisen cease
without anything left over? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and
remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. That's where the
faculty of equanimity that's arisen ceases without anything left over.
They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty
of equanimity, and who applies their mind to that end."

## The Chapter on Old Age

### N 48.41 Old Age *Jarādhammasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha
came out of retreat and sat warming his back in the last rays of the
sun.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and while massaging
the Buddha's limbs he said:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how the complexion of your skin is
no longer pure and bright. Your limbs are flaccid and wrinkled, and your
body is stooped. And it's apparent that there has been a deterioration
in your faculties of eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body."

"That's how it is, Ānanda. When young you're liable to grow old; when
healthy you're liable to get sick; and when alive you're liable to die.
The complexion of the skin is no longer pure and bright. The limbs are
flaccid and wrinkled, and the body is stooped. And it's apparent that
there has been a deterioration in the faculties of eye, ear, nose,
tongue, and body."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Curse this wretched old age,\
> which makes you so ugly.\
> That's how much this delightful puppet\
> is ground down by old age.
>
> Even if you live for a hundred years,\
> you'll still end up dying.\
> Death spares no-one,\
> but crushes all underfoot."

### N 48.42 The Brahmin Uṇṇābha *Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, these five faculties have different domains and
different ranges, and don't experience each others' domain and range.
What five? The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. What
do these five faculties, with their different domains and ranges, have
recourse to? What experiences their domains and ranges?"

"Brahmin, these five faculties have different domains and different
ranges, and don't experience each others' domain and range. What five?
The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. These five
faculties, with their different domains and ranges, have recourse to the
mind. And the mind experiences their domains and ranges."

"But worthy Gotama, what does the mind have recourse to?"

"The mind has recourse to mindfulness."

"But what does mindfulness have recourse to?"

"Mindfulness has recourse to freedom."

"But what does freedom have recourse to?"

"Freedom has recourse to extinguishment."

"But what does extinguishment have recourse to?"

"This question goes too far, brahmin! You weren't able to grasp the
limit of questioning. For extinguishment is the culmination,
destination, and end of the spiritual life."

And then the brahmin Uṇṇābha approved and agreed with what
the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then, not long after he had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Suppose there was a bungalow or a hall with a peaked roof, with windows
on the eastern side. When the sun rises and a ray of light enters
through a window, where would it land?"

"On the western wall, sir."

"In the same way, the brahmin Uṇṇābha's faith in the
Realized One is settled, rooted, and planted deep. It's strong and can't
be shifted by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or
divinity or by anyone in the world. If he were to pass away at this
time, he would be bound by no fetter that might return him to this
world."

### N 48.43 At Sāketa *Sāketasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāketa in the deer park at the Añjana Wood.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, is there a
method in which the five faculties become the five powers, and the five
powers become the five faculties?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Mendicants, there is a method in which the five faculties become the
five powers, and the five powers become the five faculties.

And what is that method? The faculty of faith is the power of faith, and
the power of faith is the faculty of faith. The faculty of energy is the
power of energy, and the power of energy is the faculty of energy. The
faculty of mindfulness is the power of mindfulness, and the power of
mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness. The faculty of immersion is
the power of immersion, and the power of immersion is the faculty of
immersion. The faculty of wisdom is the power of wisdom, and the power
of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

Suppose that there was a river slanting, sloping, and inclining to the
east, and in the middle was an island. There's a method in which that
river can be reckoned to have just one stream. But there's also a method
in which that river can be reckoned to have two streams.

And what's the method in which that river can be reckoned to have just
one stream? By taking into account the water to the east and the west of
the island, that river can be reckoned to have just one stream.

And what's the method in which that river can be reckoned to have two
streams? By taking into account the water to the north and the south of
the island, that river can be reckoned to have two streams.

By the same method, the faculty of faith is the power of faith, and the
power of faith is the faculty of faith. The faculty of energy is the
power of energy, and the power of energy is the faculty of energy. The
faculty of mindfulness is the power of mindfulness, and the power of
mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness. The faculty of immersion is
the power of immersion, and the power of immersion is the faculty of
immersion. The faculty of wisdom is the power of wisdom, and the power
of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

It's because of developing and cultivating the five faculties that a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 48.44 At the Eastern Gate *Pubbakoṭṭhakasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in
Sāvatthī at the eastern gate. Then the Buddha said to
Venerable Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, do you have faith that the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and
cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death?"

"Sir, in this case I don't rely on faith in the Buddha's claim that the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when
developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death. There are those who have not known or seen or understood or
realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this
matter. But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized,
and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties
in this matter. I have known, seen, understood, realized, and
experienced this with wisdom. I have no doubts or uncertainties that the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when
developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! There are those who have not known
or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They
may rely on faith in this matter. But there are those who have known,
seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have
no doubts or uncertainties that the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated,
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death."

### N 48.45 At the Eastern Monastery (1st) *Paṭhamapubbārāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and
cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand:
"Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to
be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate one faculty so that they can
declare enlightenment. What one? The faculty of wisdom. When a noble
disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion that
follow along with that become stabilized. This is the one faculty that a
mendicant must develop and cultivate so that they can declare
enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place"'."

### N 48.46 At the Eastern Monastery (2nd) *Dutiyapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate two faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What two? Noble wisdom and noble freedom. For
their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom. And their noble freedom is
the faculty of immersion.

These are the two faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

### N 48.47 At the Eastern Monastery (3rd) *Tatiyapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate four faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What four? The faculties of energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

### N 48.48 At the Eastern Monastery (4th) *Catutthapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate five faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the five faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

### N 48.49 About Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer *Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer had
declared enlightenment: "I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place.'"

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened. Then they said, "What reason does
Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer see for doing this?"

"It's because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed
and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment: 'I
understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed,
what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this
place."'

What three? The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

It's because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and
cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment.

What's the culmination of these three faculties? They culminate in
ending. In the ending of what? Of rebirth, old age, and death.

It's because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old
age, and death that Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer declares
enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place."'"

### N 48.50 At Āpaṇa *Āpaṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town called
Āpaṇa. Then the Buddha said to Venerable
Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, would a noble disciple who is sure and devoted
to the Realized One have any doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One
or his instructions?"

"Sir, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the Realized One would
have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One or his instructions.

You can expect that a faithful noble disciple will live with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. For their energy is the faculty
of energy.

You can expect that a faithful and energetic noble disciple will be
mindful, with utmost mindfulness and alertness, able to remember and
recall what was said and done long ago. For their mindfulness is the
faculty of mindfulness.

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, and mindful noble disciple
will, relying on letting go, gain immersion, gain unification of mind.
For their samādhi is the faculty of immersion.

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, mindful noble disciple with
their mind immersed in samādhi will understand this:
'Transmigration has no known beginning. No first point is found of
sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and
fettered by craving. But when that dark mass of ignorance fades away and
ceases with nothing left over, that state is peaceful and sublime. That
is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments,
the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' For
their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

When a noble disciple has tried again and again, recollected again and
again, entered immersion again and again, and understood with wisdom
again and again, they will be confident of this: 'I have previously
heard of these things. But now I have direct meditative experience of
them, and see them with penetrating wisdom.' For their faith is the
faculty of faith."

"Good, good, Sāriputta!

Sāriputta, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the
Realized One would have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One
or his instructions. ..."

The Buddha then repeated Sāriputta's answer word for word.

## The Chapter on the Boar's Cave

### N 48.51 At Sālā *Sālasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Sālā.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, the lion, king
of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength,
speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be
the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened. The lion,
king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength,
speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be
the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened."

### N 48.52 In the Land of the Mallas *Mallikasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Mallas, near the Mallian town called Uruvelakappa. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, as long as noble knowledge hasn't arisen for a noble
disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. But when noble
knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become
stable and fixed.

It's just like in a bungalow. As long as the roof peak is not lifted
into place, the rafters are not stable or fixed. But when the roof peak
is lifted into place, the rafters become stable and fixed.

In the same way, as long as noble knowledge hasn't arisen for a noble
disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. But when noble
knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become
stable and fixed.

What four? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion.
When a noble disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and
immersion that follow along with that become stabilized."

### N 48.53 A Trainee *Sekhasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. There the Buddha addressed
the mendicants: "Mendicants, is there a way that a mendicant who is a
trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they
are a trainee? And that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the
level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level
of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee, and that a
mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can
understand that they are an adept.

And what is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that
they are a trainee? It's when a mendicant who is a trainee truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is a way that a mendicant who
is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee reflects: 'Is there any other
ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as
accurate as that of the Buddha?' They understand: 'There is no other
ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as
accurate as that of the Buddha.' This too is a way that a mendicant who
is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee understands the five
faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And
although they don't have direct meditative experience of their
destination, apex, fruit, and culmination, they do see them with
penetrating wisdom. This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee
can understand that they are a trainee.

And what is the way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that
they are an adept? It's when a mendicant who is an adept understands the
five faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. They
have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and
culmination, and they see them with penetrating wisdom. This is a way
that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is an adept understands the six faculties:
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. They understand: 'These six
faculties will totally and utterly cease without anything left over. And
no other six faculties will arise anywhere anyhow.' This too is a way
that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept."

### N 48.54 Footprints *Padasutta*

"The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the steps that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the steps that lead to awakening? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are steps that lead to
awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the steps that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened."

### N 48.55 Heartwood *Sārasutta*

"Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened."

### N 48.56 Grounded *Patiṭṭhitasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is grounded in one thing the five
faculties become developed, well developed. What one thing? Diligence.
And what is diligence? It's when a mendicant looks after their mind when
it comes to defilements and things that stimulate defilements. As they
do so the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom
are fully developed. That's how when a mendicant is grounded in one
thing the five faculties become developed, well developed."

### N 48.57 With the Divinity Sahampati *Sahampatibrahmasutta*

At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the
Nerañjarā River.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "When
these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death."

Then the divinity Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily
as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from
the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha. He arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said:

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties are
developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death.

Once upon a time, sir, I lived the spiritual life under the fully
awakened Buddha Kassapa. There they knew me as the mendicant Sahaka.
Because of developing and cultivating these same five faculties I lost
desire for sensual pleasures. When my body broke up, after death, I was
reborn in a good place, in the realm of divinity. There they know me as
the divinity Sahampati.

That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! I know and see
how when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death."

### N 48.58 The Boar's Cave *Sūkarakhatasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain in the Boar's Cave. Then the Buddha said to
Venerable Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a mendicant with
defilements ended, while still alive, continue to show utmost devotion
for the Realized One or his instructions?"

"Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a
mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show
utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For it is considering the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant whose defilements are ended,
while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized
One or his instructions.

And what is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke?"

"It's when a mendicant with defilements ended develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which lead to peace
and awakening. It is considering this supreme sanctuary from the yoke
that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to
show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that supreme sanctuary
from the yoke.

And what is that utmost devotion that a mendicant with defilements
ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or
his instructions?"

"It's when a mendicant with defilements ended maintains respect and
reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, and immersion. This is that utmost devotion."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that utmost devotion
that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to
show towards the Realized One or his instructions."

### N 48.59 Arising (1st) *Paṭhamauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these five faculties don't arise to be developed and
cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha has appeared. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These five faculties don't arise to
be developed and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one,
a fully awakened Buddha has appeared."

### N 48.60 Arising (2nd) *Dutiyauppādasutta*

"Mendicants, these five faculties don't arise to be developed and
cultivated apart from the Holy One's training. What five? The faculties
of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These five
faculties don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart from the Holy
One's training."

## The Chapter on Leading to Awakening

### N 48.61 Fetters *Saṁyojanasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to giving up the fetters. What five? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties
are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters."

### N 48.62 Tendencies *Anusayasutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to uprooting the underlying tendencies. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to uprooting the
underlying tendencies."

### N 48.63 Complete Understanding *Pariññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to the complete understanding of the course of time. What five? The
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When
these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the
complete understanding of the course of time."

### N 48.64 Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to the ending of defilements. What five? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties
are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements."

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements.
What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead
to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the
defilements."

### N 48.65 Two Fruits *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, one of two
results can be expected: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's
something left over, non-return."

### N 48.66 Seven Benefits *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, seven fruits
and benefits can be expected. What seven? They attain enlightenment
early on in this very life. If not, they attain enlightenment at the
time of death. If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters,
they're extinguished between one life and the next ... they're
extinguished upon landing ... they're extinguished without extra effort
... they're extinguished with extra effort ... they head upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, these seven
fruits and benefits can be expected."

### N 48.67 A Tree (1st) *Paṭhamarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees in the Black Plum Tree Land, the black
plum is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is
said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to awakening?
The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are
qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming
awakened. Of all the trees in the Black Plum Tree Land, the black plum
is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said
to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened."

### N 48.68 A Tree (2nd) *Dutiyarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the gods of the thirty-three,
the Shady Orchid Tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the
faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to
awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

Of all the trees belonging to the gods of the thirty-three, the Shady
Orchid Tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened."

### N 48.69 A Tree (3rd) *Tatiyarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the titans, the vivid patala
is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said
to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to awakening?
The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are
qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming
awakened. Of all the trees belonging to the titans, the vivid patala is
said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to
be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened."

### N 48.70 A Tree (4th) *Catuttharukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red
silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to
awakening? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to
becoming awakened. Of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red
silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 48.71--82 Slanting East, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant developing and cultivating the five
faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
developing and cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 48.83--92 The Chapter on Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 48.93--104 The Chapter on Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 48.105--114 The Chapter on Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 48.115--124 Floods, etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What five? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

These five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path, SN 45.171--179,
with the above as the final discourse.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::

## Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 48.125--136 Another on Sloping East, Etc. *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant developing and cultivating the five
faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant developing and
cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to
extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## Another Chapter on Diligence

### N 48.137--146 Another Chapter on Diligence *Punaappamādavagga*

::: small
*(This text consists of the title only. Tell in full as in SN
45.139--148, removal of greed version.)*
:::

## Another Chapter on Hard Work

### N 48.147--158 Another Chapter on Hard Work *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

::: small
*(This text consists of the title only. Tell in full as in SN
45.149--160, removal of greed version.)*
:::

## Another Chapter on Searches

### N 48.159--168 Another Chapter on Searches *Punaesanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170, removal of greed version.)**

## Another Chapter on Floods

### N 48.169--178 Another Series on Floods, Etc. *Punaoghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What five? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

These five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters."

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::



# Linked Discourses on the Right Efforts

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 49.1--12 Sloping East, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha said:

"Mendicants, there are these four right efforts. What four?

It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. These are the
four right efforts.

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same
way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right efforts
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the four right efforts slant,
slope, and incline to extinguishment?

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities arise.

They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four right
efforts slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in [SN
45.92](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.92)--102.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 49.13--22 Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 49.23--34 Hard Work, Etc. *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

"Mendicants, all the hard work that gets done depends on the earth and
is grounded on the earth. In the same way, a mendicant develops and
cultivates the four right efforts depending on and grounded on ethics.

How so? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an
effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities
don't arise. ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are
not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development.

That's how a mendicant develops and cultivates the four right efforts
depending on and grounded on ethics."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 49.35--44 Ten Discourses on Searches, Etc. *Esanāvagga*

"Mendicants, there are these three searches. What three? The search for
sensual pleasures, the search for continued existence, and the search
for a spiritual path. These are the three searches.

The four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
searches. What four? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries,
makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful
qualities don't arise. ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by
development.

These four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these three
searches."

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 49.45--54 Floods, Etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What four? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries,
makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful
qualities don't arise. ... so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by
development.

These four right efforts should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in SN 45.171--179, with the above as the final
discourse.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::



# Linked Discourses on the Five Powers

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 50.1--12 Sloping East, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers. The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In
the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the five powers
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the five powers slant, slope, and
incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops the powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the five powers slants,
slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 50.13--22 Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 50.23--34 Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 50.35--44 Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 50.45--54 Floods, Etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.
What five? It's when a mendicant develops the powers of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

These five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in SN 45.171--179, with the above as the final
discourse.)*
:::

## Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 50.55--66 Sloping East, Etc. *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the five powers
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the five powers slant, slope, and
incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant develops the powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the five powers
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

::: small
*(Tell in full for each of the different rivers as in SN 45.91--102,
removal of greed version.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## Another Chapter on Diligence

### N 50.67--76 Another Chapter on Diligence *Punaappamādavagga*

::: small
*(This text consists of the title only. Tell in full as in SN
45.139--148, removal of greed version.)*
:::

## Another Chapter on Hard Work

### N 50.77--88 Another Chapter on Hard Work *Punabalakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.149--160, removal of greed version.)**

## Another Chapter on Searches

### N 50.89--98 Another Series on Searches, Etc. *Punaesanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170, removal of greed version.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## Another Chapter on Floods

### N 50.99--108 Another Series on Floods, Etc. *Punaoghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters.
What five? A mendicant develops the powers of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion.

These five powers should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters."

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::



# Linked Discourses on the Bases of Psychic Power

## The Chapter at the Cāpāla Shrine

### N 51.1 From the Near Shore *Apārasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What
four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort.
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. When these four
bases of psychic power are developed and cultivated they lead to going
from the near shore to the far shore."

### N 51.2 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the four bases of psychic power
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken the four bases of psychic power has undertaken
the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. What four? It's when
a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. Whoever has missed out on these four bases of psychic power has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four bases of psychic power has undertaken
the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

### N 51.3 A Noble One *Ariyasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering. What four? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. When these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering."

### N 51.4 Disillusionment *Nibbidāsutta*

"Mendicants, these four bases of psychic power, when developed and
cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. What four? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. These four bases of psychic power, when developed and
cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

### N 51.5 Partly *Iddhipadesasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have partly
manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and cultivating the
four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the future
who will partly manifest psychic powers will do so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and
brahmins in the present who are partly manifesting psychic powers do so
by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past who have partly manifested psychic powers have done so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. All the
ascetics and brahmins in the future who will partly manifest psychic
powers will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of
psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are
partly manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating
these four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.6 Completely *Samattasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have
completely manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and
brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic powers will
do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All
the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are completely manifesting
psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of
psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past who have completely manifested psychic powers have done so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. All the
ascetics and brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic
powers will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of
psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are
completely manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and
cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.7 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, all the mendicants in the past ... future ... present who
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and who live having realized it with their own insight due to
the ending of defilements, do so by developing and cultivating the four
bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the mendicants in the past ...
future ... present who realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and who live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, do so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.8 Awakened *Buddhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
It is because he has developed and cultivated these four bases of
psychic power that the Realized One is called 'the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha'."

### N 51.9 Knowledge *Ñāṇasutta*

"Mendicants: 'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort.' Such was the vision, knowledge,
wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not
learned before from another. 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy,
and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ...
should be developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been
developed.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and
light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from
another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry,
and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another."

### N 51.10 At the Cāpāla Shrine *Cetiyasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof. Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, get your
sitting cloth. Let's go to the Cāpāla Shrine for the day's
meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla Shrine, and sat down
on the seat spread out. Ānanda bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

For a second time ... and for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

Then the Buddha said to him, "Go now, Ānanda, at your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked
went up to the Buddha and said to him:

"Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha. Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall
not be fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who are competent,
educated, assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice
in line with the teachings. Not until they practice properly, living in
line with the teaching. Not until they've learned their own tradition,
and explain, teach, assert, establish, disclose, analyze, and make it
clear. Not until they can legitimately and completely refute the
doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.'

Today you do have such monk disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...' ...

Today you do have such nun disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have layman disciples ... and laywoman disciples
who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ...

Today you do have such layman and laywoman disciples. May the Blessed
One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully
extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans.' Today your spiritual path is successful and
prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever
there are gods and humans. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha."

When this was said, the Buddha said to Māra, "Relax, Wicked
One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon. Three
months from now the Realized One will be fully extinguished."

So at the Cāpāla Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware,
surrendered the life force. When he did so there was a great earthquake,
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky. Then,
understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this
heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable\
> \>with the creation of prolonged life,\
> the sage surrendered the life force.\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor."

## The Chapter on Shaking the Stilt Longhouse

### N 51.11 Before *Pubbasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the cause, what's the reason
for the development of the bases of psychic power?' Then it occurred to
me: 'It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: "My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they
develop a mind that's full of radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: "My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.'

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they understand the minds of other beings and individuals,
having comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with
greed as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without
greed'. They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind
with delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ...
scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is
not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two,
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see
sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how
sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. 'These dear beings
did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the
noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong
view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however,
did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced
the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that
right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.12 Very Fruitful *Mahapphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when the four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they're very fruitful and beneficial. How so? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: 'My enthusiasm won't be too
lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted internally nor
scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving before and behind:
as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so above; as
above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance. When the four bases of psychic power have been
developed and cultivated in this way they're very fruitful and
beneficial.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. ...

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.13 Immersion Due to Enthusiasm *Chandasamādhisutta*

"Mendicants, if a mendicant depends on enthusiasm in order to gain
immersion, gain unification of mind, this is called immersion due to
enthusiasm. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have
arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development. These are called active efforts. And so there is this
enthusiasm, this immersion due to enthusiasm, and these active efforts.
This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort.

If a mendicant depends on energy in order to gain immersion, gain
unification of mind, this is called immersion due to energy. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are fulfilled by development. These are called active efforts. And
so there is this energy, this immersion due to energy, and these active
efforts. This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion
due to energy, and active effort.

If a mendicant depends on mental development in order to gain immersion,
gain unification of mind, this is called immersion due to mental
development. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so
that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but
increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. These are called
active efforts. And so there is this mental development, this immersion
due to mental development, and these active efforts. This is called the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and
active effort.

If a mendicant depends on inquiry in order to gain immersion, gain
unification of mind, this is called immersion due to inquiry. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are fulfilled by development. These are called active efforts. And
so there is this inquiry, this immersion due to inquiry, and these
active efforts. This is called the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort."

### N 51.14 With Moggallāna *Moggallānasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. Now at that time several mendicants
were staying beneath the longhouse. They were restless, insolent,
fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational
awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined
faculties.

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, "These
spiritual companions of yours staying beneath the longhouse are
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful,
lacking situational awareness and immersion, with wandering mind and
undisciplined faculties. Go, Moggallāna, and strike awe in
those mendicants!"

"Yes, sir," replied Mahāmoggallāna. Then he used his
psychic power to make the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his
big toe. Then those mendicants stood to one side, shocked and awestruck.

"Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! There's no wind at all; and this
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother has deep foundations.
It's firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes
and rocks and trembles!"

Then the Buddha went up to those mendicants and said:

"Why do you, mendicants, stand to one side, shocked and awestruck?"

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! There's no wind at all; and this
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother has deep foundations.
It's firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes
and rocks and trembles!"

"Wanting to strike awe in you, the mendicant Moggallāna
made the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his big toe.

What do you think, mendicants? What things has the mendicant
Moggallāna developed and cultivated so as to have such
power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen. The mendicant Moggallāna
has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating the four
bases of psychic power. What four? Moggallāna develops the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates perceiving before
and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so
above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind
that's full of radiance. The mendicant Moggallāna has
become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating these four
bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic power
... controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. ...

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.15 The Brahmin Uṇṇābha *Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Then
Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to Venerable Ānanda, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to him, "Worthy Ānanda,
what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic
Gotama?"

"The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha, brahmin, is
to give up desire."

"But is there a path and a practice for giving up that desire?"

"There is."

"What is that path?"

"It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. This is the path and the practice for giving
up that desire."

"This being the case, worthy Ānanda, the path is endless, not finite.
For it's not possible to give up desire by means of desire."

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? Have you ever had a
desire to walk to the park, but when you arrived at the park, the
corresponding desire faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever had the energy to walk to the park, but when you arrived
at the park, the corresponding energy faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever had the idea to walk to the park, but when you arrived at
the park, the corresponding idea faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever inquired regarding a walk to the park, but when you
arrived at the park, the corresponding inquiry faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, take a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment. They formerly had the desire to attain perfection, but
when they attained perfection the corresponding desire faded away. They
formerly had the energy to attain perfection, but when they attained
perfection the corresponding energy faded away. They formerly had the
idea to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the
corresponding idea faded away. They formerly inquired regarding
attaining perfection, but when they attained perfection the
corresponding inquiry faded away. What do you think, brahmin? This being
the case, is the path endless or finite?"

"Clearly, worthy Ānanda, this being the case, the path is finite, not
endless. Excellent, worthy Ānanda! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, the worthy Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many
ways. I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the worthy
Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 51.16 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or
present who are mighty and powerful have become so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past, future, or present who are mighty and powerful have become so by
developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.17 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or
present who wield the various kinds of psychic power---multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful; controlling their body as far as the realm of
divinity---do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic
power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. Mendicants, all the ascetics and
brahmins in the past, future, or present who wield the many kinds of
psychic power---multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling their body as far as the realm of divinity---do so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.18 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic
power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. By developing and cultivating these four
bases of psychic power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.19 A Teaching on Psychic Power, Etc. *Iddhādidesanāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you psychic power, the bases of psychic power,
the development of the bases of psychic power, and the practice that
leads to the development of the bases of psychic power. Listen ...

And what is psychic power? It's when a mendicant wields the many kinds
of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called
psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

### N 51.20 Analysis *Vibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, when the four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they're very fruitful and beneficial.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that
has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they
develop a mind that's full of radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.

And what is enthusiasm that's too lax? It's when enthusiasm is combined
with laziness. This is called lax enthusiasm.

And what is enthusiasm that's too tense? It's when enthusiasm is
combined with restlessness. This is called tense enthusiasm.

And what is enthusiasm that's constricted internally? It's when
enthusiasm is combined with dullness and drowsiness. This is called
enthusiasm constricted internally.

And what is enthusiasm that's scattered externally? It's when enthusiasm
is frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. This is called enthusiasm scattered
externally.

And how does a mendicant meditate perceiving before and behind: as
before, so behind; as behind, so before? It's when the perception of
before and behind is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and
comprehended with wisdom by a mendicant. That's how a mendicant
meditates perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind,
so before.

And how does a mendicant meditate as below, so above; as above, so
below? It's when a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles
of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and
full of many kinds of filth. 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' That's how a mendicant
meditates as below, so above; as above, so below.

And how does a mendicant meditate as by day, so by night; as by night,
so by day? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort, with the same
features, attributes, and signs by day as by night. And they develop it
with the same features, attributes, and signs by night as by day. That's
how a mendicant meditates as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day.

And how, with an open and unenveloped heart, does a mendicant develop a
mind that's full of radiance? It's when a mendicant has properly grasped
the perception of light, and has properly grasped the perception of day.
That's how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a mendicant develops a
mind that's full of radiance.

And what is energy that's too lax? ...

And what is mental development that's too lax? ...

And what is inquiry that's too lax? It's when inquiry is combined with
laziness. This is called lax inquiry.

And what is inquiry that's too tense? It's when inquiry is combined with
restlessness. This is called tense inquiry.

And what is inquiry that's constricted internally? It's when inquiry is
combined with dullness and drowsiness. This is called inquiry
constricted internally.

And what is inquiry that's scattered externally? It's when inquiry is
frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. This is called inquiry scattered
externally. ... That's how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a
mendicant develops a mind that's full of radiance. When the four bases
of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way they're
very fruitful and beneficial.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. When the four bases of psychic power
have been developed and cultivated in this way, they realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements."

## The Chapter on the Iron Ball

### N 51.21 The Path *Maggasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the path and practice for
developing the bases of psychic power?' Then it occurred to me: 'It's
when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion
due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: "My enthusiasm won't
be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted internally nor
scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving before and behind:
as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so above; as
above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: "My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.'

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

**(The six direct knowledges should be told in full.)**

### N 51.22 The Iron Ball *Ayoguḷasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, do you have personal experience of going to the realm of divinity
by psychic power with a mind-made body?"

"I do, Ānanda."

"But do you have personal experience of going to the realm of divinity
by psychic power with this body made up of the four principal states?"

"I do, Ānanda."

"It's incredible and amazing that the Buddha is capable of going to the
realm of divinity by psychic power with a mind-made body! And that he
has personal experience of going to the realm of divinity by psychic
power with this body made up of the four principal states!"

"Ānanda, the Realized Ones are incredible and have incredible qualities.
They're amazing and have amazing qualities.

Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body becomes lighter, softer,
more workable, and more radiant.

Suppose there was an iron ball that had been heated all day. It'd become
lighter, softer, more workable, and more radiant. In the same way,
sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body becomes lighter, softer,
more workable, and more radiant.

Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body easily rises up from the
ground into the air. He wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity.

Suppose there was a light tuft of cotton-wool or kapok. Taken up by the
wind, it would easily rise up from the ground into the air. In the same
way, sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his
mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss
and lightness in the body. At that time his body easily rises up from
the ground into the air. He wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity."

### N 51.23 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
By developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.24 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power."

### N 51.25 Fruits (1st) *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power,
one of two results can be expected: enlightenment in this very life, or
if there's something left over, non-return."

### N 51.26 Fruits (2nd) *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power,
seven fruits and benefits can be expected.

What seven? They attain enlightenment early on in this very life. If
not, they attain enlightenment at the time of death. If not, with the
ending of the five lower fetters, they're extinguished between one life
and the next ... they're extinguished upon landing ... they're
extinguished without extra effort ... they're extinguished with extra
effort ... they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha
realm. Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic
power, these seven fruits and benefits can be expected."

### N 51.27 With Ānanda (1st) *Paṭhamaānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is
the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice
that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Ānanda, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

### N 51.28 With Ānanda (2nd) *Dutiyaānandasutta*

The Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, what is psychic power?
What is the basis of psychic power? What is the development of the bases
of psychic power? And what is the practice that leads to the development
of the bases of psychic power?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"Ānanda, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

### N 51.29 Several Mendicants (1st) *Paṭhamabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is
the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice
that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic
power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the
body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

### N 51.30 Several Mendicants (2nd) *Dutiyabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... The Buddha said to
them:

"Mendicants, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power?
What is the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"And what is psychic power? It's a mendicant who wields the many kinds
of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called
psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

### N 51.31 About Moggallāna *Moggallānasutta*

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "What do you think,
mendicants? What things has the mendicant Moggallāna
developed and cultivated so as to have such power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty
by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? Moggallāna develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he
develops a mind that's full of radiance.

He develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' ... And so, with an open and
unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that's full of radiance. The
mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic
power: multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the
body as far as the realm of divinity.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements."

### N 51.32 The Realized One *Tathāgatasutta*

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "What do you think,
mendicants? What things has the Realized One developed and cultivated so
as to have such power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"The Realized One has become so powerful and mighty by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he
develops a mind that's full of radiance.

He develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates perceiving before
and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so
above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind
that's full of radiance.

The Realized One has become so powerful and mighty by developing and
cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
Realized One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself
and becoming one again ... controlling the body as far as the realm of
divinity.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
Realized One realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And he lives having realized it with his own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

**(The six direct knowledges should be told in full.)**

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 51.33--44 The Ganges River, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four bases
of psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the four bases of psychic power
slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant
develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm
... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four bases of
psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 51.45--54 Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 51.55--66 Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 51.67--76 Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 51.77--86 Floods, Etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The four bases of psychic power should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters. What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ...
mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. These four bases of
psychic power should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path at SN
45.171--180.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::


**The Linked Discourses on the Bases of psychic Power is the seventh section.**

# Linked Discourses with Anuruddha

## The Chapter on In Private

### N 52.1 In Private (1st) *Paṭhamarahogatasutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Anuruddha was
staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then as Anuruddha was in private
retreat this thought came to his mind:

"Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha
was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha, and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?"

"Reverend, it's when a mendicant meditates observing the body internally
as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate
and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing the body externally
as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to originate
and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing the body internally
and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to originate and vanish---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's what they do. If
they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive
and the repulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do.

They meditate observing feelings internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

They meditate observing the mind internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

They meditate observing principles internally ... externally ...
internally and externally as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to originate and vanish ...

If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. ... If they wish: 'May I meditate
staying equanimous, mindful and aware, ignoring both the repulsive and
the unrepulsive,' that's what they do.

That's how to define the undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation by a mendicant."

### N 52.2 In Private (2nd) *Dutiyarahogatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then as Anuruddha was in private retreat this thought came to his mind:

"Whoever has missed out on these four kinds of mindfulness meditation
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four kinds of mindfulness meditation has
undertaken the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna knew what Venerable Anuruddha
was thinking. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, he reappeared in front of Anuruddha and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, how do you define the undertaking of the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant?"

"Reverend, it's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body internally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the body
externally ... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally ... externally
... internally and externally ...

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally ... externally
... internally and externally ...

They meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...
externally ... internally and externally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how to define the
undertaking of the four kinds of mindfulness meditation by a mendicant."

### N 52.3 On the Bank of the Sutanu *Sutanusutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
on the bank of the Sutanu. Then several mendicants went up to Venerable
Anuruddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I attained great
direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And it was by developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness
meditation that I directly knew the lower realm as lower, the middle
realm as middle, and the higher realm as higher."

### N 52.4 At Thorny Wood (1st) *Paṭhamakaṇḍakīsutta*

At one time the venerables Anuruddha, Sāriputta, and
Mahāmoggallāna were staying near Sāketa, in
the Thorny Wood. Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta and
Mahāmoggallāna came out of retreat, went to Anuruddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, they sat down to one side. Sāriputta said to
Anuruddha:

"Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a trainee mendicant enter and
remain in?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, a trainee mendicant should enter and
remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when
a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They
meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. A
trainee mendicant should enter and remain in these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation."

### N 52.5 At Thorny Wood (2nd) *Dutiyakaṇḍakīsutta*

At Sāketa. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha:

"Reverend Anuruddha, what things should a mendicant who is an adept
enter and remain in?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, a mendicant who is an adept should
enter and remain in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four?
It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. A mendicant who is an adept should enter and
remain in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

### N 52.6 At Thorny Wood (3rd) *Tatiyakaṇḍakīsutta*

At Sāketa. Sāriputta said to Anuruddha:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverend, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid
of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. I attained great
direct knowledge by developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I directly know the thousandfold galaxy."

### N 52.7 The Ending of Craving *Taṇhākkhayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Anuruddha said this:

"Reverends, when these four kinds of mindfulness meditation are
developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of craving. What four?
It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body ...
feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. When these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated they lead to the
ending of craving."

### N 52.8 The Frankincense-Tree Hut *Salaḷāgārasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in the frankincense-tree hut. There Venerable Anuruddha addressed the
mendicants: "Reverends, suppose that, although the Ganges river slants,
slopes, and inclines to the east, a large crowd were to come along with
a spade and basket, saying: 'We'll make this Ganges river slant, slope,
and incline to the west!' What do you think, reverends? Would they
succeed?"

"No, reverend. Why is that? The Ganges river slants, slopes, and
inclines to the east. It's not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline
to the west. That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, while a mendicant develops and cultivates the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, if rulers or their chief ministers,
friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept
wealth, saying: 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment
you? Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms
bowl? Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!'

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who is developing and cultivating
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation to resign the training and
return to a lesser life. Why is that? Because for a long time that
mendicant's mind has slanted, sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it's
impossible for them to return to a lesser life.

And how does a mendicant develop and cultivate the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an
aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant develops and cultivates the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

### N 52.9 In Ambapālī's Mango Grove *Ambapālivanasutta*

At one time the venerables Anuruddha and Sāriputta were
staying near Vesālī, in Ambapālī's Mango
Grove. Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of
retreat, went to Anuruddha, and said to him:

"Reverend Anuruddha, your faculties are so very clear, and your
complexion is pure and bright. What kind of meditation are you usually
practicing these days?"

"These days, reverend, I usually meditate with my mind firmly
established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. These days I usually meditate with my mind
firmly established in these four kinds of mindfulness meditation. A
mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---usually
meditates with their mind firmly established in these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation."

"We're so fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate, to have heard such a
dramatic statement in the presence of Venerable Anuruddha."

### N 52.10 Gravely Ill *Bāḷhagilānasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in the Dark Forest. And he was sick, suffering, gravely ill. Then
several mendicants went up to Venerable Anuruddha, and said to him:

"What meditation does Venerable Anuruddha practice so that physical pain
doesn't occupy his mind?"

"Reverends, I meditate with my mind firmly established in the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation so that physical pain doesn't occupy my mind.
What four? I meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ...
mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. I meditate with my mind firmly established in
these four kinds of mindfulness meditation so that physical pain doesn't
occupy my mind."

## Chapter Two

### N 52.11 A Thousand Eons *Kappasahassasutta*

At one time Venerable Anuruddha was staying near Sāvatthī
in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then several
mendicants went up to Venerable Anuruddha, exchanged greetings with him
... and said:

"What things has Venerable Anuruddha developed and cultivated to attain
great direct knowledge?"

"Reverends, I attained great direct knowledge by developing and
cultivating the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? I
meditate observing an aspect of the body ... feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. I attained great direct knowledge by
developing and cultivating these four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I recollect a thousand eons."

### N 52.12 Psychic Powers *Iddhividhasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying myself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity."

### N 52.13 Clairaudience *Dibbasotasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that, with clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far."

### N 52.14 Comprehending the Mind *Cetopariyasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. I understand mind
with greed as 'mind with greed' ... I understand unfreed mind as
'unfreed mind'."

### N 52.15 Possible *Ṭhānasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the possible as possible
and the impossible as impossible."

### N 52.16 The Results of Deeds Undertaken *Kammasamādānasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes."

### N 52.17 Where All Paths of Practice Lead *Sabbatthagāminisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand where all paths of
practice lead."

### N 52.18 Diverse Elements *Nānādhātusutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the world with its many
and diverse elements."

### N 52.19 Diverse Beliefs *Nānādhimuttisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the diverse convictions
of sentient beings."

### N 52.20 Comprehending the Faculties of Others *Indriyaparopariyattasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with my
mind."

### N 52.21 Absorptions, Etc. *Jhānādisutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I truly understand corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments."

### N 52.22 Past Lives *Pubbenivāsasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I recollect my many kinds of past lives,
with features and details."

### N 52.23 Clairvoyance *Dibbacakkhusutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, I understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds."

### N 52.24 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"... And it's because of developing and cultivating these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation that I realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And I live having realized it
with my own insight due to the ending of defilements."



# Linked Discourses on Absorption

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 53.1--12 Absorptions, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four absorptions. What four?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it connected.

And with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.'

Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness,
they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or
pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

These are the four absorptions.

The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east. In the same
way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four
absorptions slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.

As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they
enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four absorptions
slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 53.13--22 Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 53.23--34 Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

## The Chapter on Searches

### N 53.35--44 Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

## The Chapter on Floods

### N 53.45--54 Floods, etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The four absorptions should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What four? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. These four
absorptions should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path at SN
45.171--180.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::



# Linked Discourses on Breath Meditation

## The Chapter on One Thing

### N 54.1 One Thing *Ekadhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when one thing is developed and cultivated it's very
fruitful and beneficial. What one thing? Mindfulness of breathing.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated to be very
fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When breathing in
lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly
they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out experiencing the whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe in stilling physical processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out stilling physical processes.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing bliss.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing bliss.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing mental processes.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in gladdening the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out gladdening the mind.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in
samādhi.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing
the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing impermanence.'

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing cessation.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out observing cessation.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial."

### N 54.2 Awakening Factors *Bojjhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial? It's when a
mendicant develops mindfulness of breathing together with the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. Mindfulness of breathing,
when developed and cultivated in this way, is very fruitful and
beneficial."

### N 54.3 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial."

### N 54.4 Fruits (1st) *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial. When mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated in this way you can expect one of two results:
enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something left over,
non-return."

### N 54.5 Fruits (2nd) *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated
it's very fruitful and beneficial. And how is mindfulness of breathing
developed and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

Mindfulness of breathing, when developed and cultivated in this way, is
very fruitful and beneficial.

When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in this way
you can expect seven fruits and benefits. What seven? You attain
enlightenment early on in this very life. If not, you attain
enlightenment at the time of death. If not, with the ending of the five
lower fetters you're extinguished in between one life and the next ...
you're extinguished upon landing ... you're extinguished without extra
effort ... you're extinguished with extra effort ... you head upstream,
going to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... When mindfulness of
breathing is developed and cultivated in this way you can expect these
seven fruits and benefits."

### N 54.6 With Ariṭṭha *Ariṭṭhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha ... said:

"Mendicants, do you develop mindfulness of breathing?" When he said
this, Venerable Ariṭṭha said to him:

"Sir, I develop mindfulness of breathing."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"Sir, I've given up desire for sensual pleasures of the past. I'm rid of
desire for sensual pleasures of the future. And I have eliminated
perception of repulsion regarding phenomena internally and externally.
Just mindful, I will breathe in. Mindful, I will breathe out. That's how
I develop mindfulness of breathing."

"That is mindfulness of breathing, Ariṭṭha; I don't deny
it. But as to how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in detail,
listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ariṭṭha replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how is mindfulness of breathing fulfilled in detail? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they breathe
in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing
out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing
letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing
letting go.' This is how mindfulness of breathing is fulfilled in
detail."

### N 54.7 About Mahākappina *Mahākappinasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time Venerable Mahākappina was sitting not far
from the Buddha, cross-legged, his body set straight, and mindfulness
established in his presence. The Buddha saw him, and addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, do you see any disturbance or trembling in that mendicant's
body?"

"Sir, whenever we see that mendicant meditating---whether in the middle
of the Saṅgha or alone in private---we never see any
disturbance or trembling in his body."

"Mendicants, when an immersion has been developed and cultivated there's
no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind. That mendicant gets
such immersion when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. And what is
that immersion?

When immersion due to mindfulness of breathing has been developed and
cultivated there's no disturbance or trembling of the body or mind. And
how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and
cultivated in such a way?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ... They practice like this:
'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so that there's no disturbance or trembling of the body or
mind."

### N 54.8 The Simile of the Lamp *Padīpopamasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it's very fruitful and beneficial. How so?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting go.' That's how immersion due to mindfulness of
breathing, when developed and cultivated, is very fruitful and
beneficial.

Before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but intent on
awakening---I too usually practiced this kind of meditation. And while I
was usually practicing this kind of meditation neither my body nor my
eyes became fatigued. And my mind was freed from defilements by not
grasping.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May neither my body nor my eyes became
fatigued. And may my mind be freed from the defilements by not
grasping.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I give up memories and thoughts tied
to domestic life.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive and the repulsive.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive and the unrepulsive.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.' So let
them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, may I enter and remain in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected.' So let them closely focus on
this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, may I enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' So
let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of
breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'With the fading away of rapture, may I
enter and remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss."' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'With the giving up of pleasure and pain,
and the ending of former happiness and sadness, may I enter and remain
in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness.' So let them closely focus on this immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond perceptions of form,
with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite", may I enter
and remain in the dimension of infinite space.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", may I enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", may I
enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.' So let them closely
focus on this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, may I enter and remain in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'Going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, may I enter and remain in the
cessation of perception and feeling.' So let them closely focus on this
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

When immersion due to mindfulness of breathing has been developed and
cultivated in this way, if they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand
that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it, and that they
don't take pleasure in it. If they feel a painful feeling, they
understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it, and
that they don't take pleasure in it. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they understand that it's impermanent, that they're not attached to it,
and that they don't take pleasure in it.

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a
painful feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a neutral feeling,
they feel it detached. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they
understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of
life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.'
They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right here.'

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. As the oil and
the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed. In
the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand:
'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, since I no longer take pleasure in it, will
become cool right here.'"

### N 54.9 At Vesālī *Vesālīsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof. Now at that time the Buddha spoke in many ways to the mendicants
about the meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness
and its development.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, I wish to go on
retreat for a fortnight. No-one should approach me, except for the one
who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then those mendicants thought, "The Buddha spoke in many ways about the
meditation on ugliness. He praised the meditation on ugliness and its
development." They committed themselves to developing the many different
facets of the meditation on ugliness. Becoming horrified, repelled, and
disgusted with this body, they looked for something to take their life.
Each day ten, twenty, or thirty mendicants took their lives.

Then after a fortnight had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed Ānanda, "Ānanda, why does the mendicant Saṅgha
seem so diminished?"

Ānanda told the Buddha all that had happened, and said, "Sir, please
explain another way for the mendicant Saṅgha to get
enlightened."

"Well then, Ānanda, gather all the mendicants staying in the vicinity of
Vesālī together in the assembly hall."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked, went up to
him, and said, "Sir, the mendicant Saṅgha has assembled.
Please, sir, come at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread
out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
developed and cultivated it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously
pleasant meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities
on the spot whenever they arise.

In the last month of summer, when the dust and dirt is stirred up, a
large sudden storm disperses and settles it on the spot.

In the same way, when this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
developed and cultivated it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously
pleasant meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities
on the spot whenever they arise. And how is it so developed and
cultivated?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how this immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated so that it's peaceful and sublime, a deliciously pleasant
meditation. And it disperses and settles unskillful qualities on the
spot whenever they arise."

### N 54.10 With Kimbila *Kimilasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then the Buddha
said to Venerable Kimbila, "Kimbila, how is immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very fruitful and
beneficial?"

When he said this, Kimbila kept silent.

For a second time ...

And for a third time, the Buddha said to him, "How is immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so that it is very
fruitful and beneficial?" And a second time and a third time Kimbila
kept silent.

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Now is the
time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha speak on
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing. The mendicants will listen
and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, how is immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and
cultivated so that it is very fruitful and beneficial? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence.

Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.' That's how
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing, when developed and
cultivated, is very fruitful and beneficial.

There's a time when a mendicant is breathing in heavily, and they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm
breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing
out lightly.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the
whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the
whole body.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling physical
processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling physical
processes.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because the breath is a certain
aspect of the body, I say. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is
meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing rapture.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing rapture.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing bliss.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing bliss.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mental processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll
breathe out experiencing the mental processes.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.' At such a time a mendicant
is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. Why is that?
Because careful application of mind to the in-breaths and out-breaths is
a certain aspect of feelings, I say. Therefore, at such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
gladdening the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
gladdening the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
immersing the mind in samādhi.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.' At such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
Why is that? Because there is no development of immersion due to
mindfulness of breathing for someone who is unmindful and lacks
awareness, I say. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing impermanence.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing fading away.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing cessation.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
observing letting go.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. Having seen with wisdom the
giving up of covetousness and displeasure, they watch closely over with
equanimity. Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by
observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Suppose there was a large heap of sand at the crossroads. And a cart or
chariot were to come by from the east, west, north, or south and destroy
that heap of sand.

In the same way, when a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect
of the body, feelings, mind, or principles, they destroy bad, unskillful
qualities."

## Chapter Two

### N 54.11 Icchānaṅgala *Icchānaṅgalasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. There he addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood."

"Yes, sir," replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the
rainy season residence?' You should answer them like this. 'Reverends,
the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the rainy season residence
was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.'

In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out.

Breathing in heavily I know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out
heavily I know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When breathing in lightly I
know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing out lightly I know: 'I'm
breathing out lightly.' I know: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole
body.' ...

I know: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' I know: 'I'll breathe
out observing letting go.'

For if anything should be rightly called 'a noble meditation', or else
'a divine meditation', or else 'a realized one's meditation', it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

For those mendicants who are trainees---who haven't achieved their
heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke---the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing leads to the ending of defilements.

For those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---the development
and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to
blissful meditation in this life, and to mindfulness and awareness.

For if anything should be rightly called 'a noble meditation', or else
'a divine meditation', or else 'a realized one's meditation', it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing."

### N 54.12 In Doubt *Kaṅkheyyasutta*

At one time Venerable Lomasakaṅgiya was staying in the land
of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then
Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to Venerable
Lomasakaṅgiya, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, is the meditation of a trainee just the same as the
meditation of a realized one? Or is the meditation of a trainee
different from the meditation of a realized one?"

"Reverend Mahānāma, the meditation of a trainee and a
realized one are not the same; they are different. Those mendicants who
are trainees haven't achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring
for the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. They meditate after giving up
the five hindrances. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill
will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

Those who are trainee mendicants ... meditate after giving up the five
hindrances.

Those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---for them, the
five hindrances are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. What five? The
hindrances of sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

Those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements ...
for them, the five hindrances are cut off at the root ... and unable to
arise in the future. And here's another way to understand how the
meditation of a trainee and a realized one are different.

At one time the Buddha was staying in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. There he addressed the mendicants,
'Mendicants, I wish to go on retreat for three months. No-one should
approach me, except for the one who brings my almsfood.'

'Yes, sir,' replied those mendicants. And no-one approached him, except
for the one who brought the almsfood.

Then after three months had passed, the Buddha came out of retreat and
addressed the mendicants:

'Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
"Reverends, what was the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the
rainy season residence?" You should answer them like this: "Reverends,
the ascetic Gotama's usual meditation during the rainy season residence
was immersion due to mindfulness of breathing."

In this regard: mindful, I breathe in. Mindful, I breathe out.

Breathing in heavily I know: "I'm breathing in heavily." Breathing out
heavily I know: "I'm breathing out heavily." ...

I know: "I'll breathe in observing letting go." I know: "I'll breathe
out observing letting go."

For if anything should be rightly called "noble meditation", or else
"divine meditation', or else "a realized one's meditation", it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.

For those mendicants who are trainees---who haven't achieved their
heart's desire, but live aspiring for the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke---the development and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness
of breathing leads to the ending of defilements.

For those mendicants who are perfected---who have ended the defilements,
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and are rightly freed through enlightenment---the development
and cultivation of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing leads to
blissful meditation in this very life, and to mindfulness and awareness.

For if anything should be rightly called "noble meditation", or else
"divine meditation', or else "a realized one's meditation", it's
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing.'

This is another way to understand how the meditation of a trainee and a
realized one are different."

### N 54.13 With Ānanda (1st) *Paṭhamaānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills
four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"There is, Ānanda."

"Sir, what is that one thing?"

"Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven
awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and
freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. Just mindful, they breathe
in. Mindful, they breathe out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing
out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing
letting go.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing
letting go.'

There's a time when a mendicant is breathing in heavily, and they know:
'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm
breathing out heavily.' ... They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
stilling physical processes.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
stilling physical processes.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because the
breath is a certain aspect of the body, I say. Therefore, at such a time
a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the body---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing rapture ... bliss ... mind ...' ... They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.' At such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
Why is that? Because careful application of mind to the in-breaths and
out-breaths is a certain aspect of feelings, I say. Therefore, at such a
time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of
feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure
for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out
experiencing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in
gladdening the mind ... immersing the mind in samādhi ...
freeing the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing
the mind.' At such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of the mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Why is that? Because there is no development
of immersion due to mindfulness of breathing for someone who is
unmindful and lacks awareness, I say. Therefore, at such a time a
mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

There's a time when a mendicant practices like this: 'I'll breathe in
observing impermanence ... fading away ... cessation ... letting go.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.' At
such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. Having seen with wisdom the giving up of
covetousness and displeasure, they watch closely over with equanimity.
Therefore, at such a time a mendicant is meditating by observing an
aspect of principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.

And how are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation developed and
cultivated so as to fulfill the seven awakening factors? Whenever a
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body, their
mindfulness is established and lucid. At such a time, a mendicant has
activated the awakening factor of mindfulness; they develop it and
perfect it.

As they live mindfully in this way they investigate, explore, and
inquire into that principle with wisdom. At such a time, a mendicant has
activated the awakening factor of investigation of principles; they
develop it and perfect it.

As they investigate principles with wisdom in this way their energy is
roused up and unflagging. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the
awakening factor of energy; they develop it and perfect it.

When you're energetic, rapture not of the flesh arises. At such a time,
a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of rapture; they develop
it and perfect it.

When the mind is full of rapture, the body and mind become tranquil. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
tranquility; they develop it and perfect it.

When the body is tranquil and one feels bliss, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. At such a time, a mendicant has activated the
awakening factor of immersion; they develop it and perfect it.

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
equanimity; they develop it and perfect it.

Whenever a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings ...
mind ... principles, their mindfulness is established and lucid. At such
a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of mindfulness;
they develop it and perfect it. ...

**(Tell in full as for the first kind of mindfulness meditation.)**

They closely watch over that mind immersed in samādhi. At
such a time, a mendicant has activated the awakening factor of
equanimity; they develop it and perfect it. That's how the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation are developed and cultivated so as to fulfill the
seven awakening factors.

And how are the seven awakening factors developed and cultivated so as
to fulfill knowledge and freedom? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's
how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.14 With Ānanda (2nd) *Dutiyaānandasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, is there one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills four things; and those four things,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven
things, when developed and cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is, Ānanda.

And what is that one thing? Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And
the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill
knowledge and freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.15 Several Mendicants (1st) *Paṭhamabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills
four things; and those four things, when developed and cultivated,
fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"There is, mendicants."

"Sir, what is that one thing?"

"Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is one thing that, when
developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And the seven
awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill knowledge and
freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.16 Several Mendicants (2nd) *Dutiyabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to them:

"Mendicants, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
fulfills four things; and those four things, when developed and
cultivated, fulfill seven things; and those seven things, when developed
and cultivated, fulfill two things?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is, mendicants.

And what is that one thing? Immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is
one thing that, when developed and cultivated, fulfills the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. And the four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
when developed and cultivated, fulfill the seven awakening factors. And
the seven awakening factors, when developed and cultivated, fulfill
knowledge and freedom.

And how is mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as to
fulfill the four kinds of mindfulness meditation? It's when a
mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight, and
establishes mindfulness in their presence. ...

That's how the seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated so
as to fulfill knowledge and freedom."

### N 54.17 Giving Up the Fetters *Saṁyojanappahānasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to giving up the fetters ..."

### N 54.18 Uprooting the Tendencies *Anusayasamugghātasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to uprooting the underlying tendencies ..."

### N 54.19 Completely Understanding the Course of Time *Addhānapariññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to completely understanding the course of time
..."

### N 54.20 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, when immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed
and cultivated it leads to the ending of defilements. And how is
immersion due to mindfulness of breathing developed and cultivated so as
to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in front of them. ...

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing letting go.'

That's how immersion due to mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated so as to lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the
underlying tendencies, completely understanding the course of time, and
ending the defilements."

**The Linked Discourses on Mindfulness of Breathing is the tenth section.**

# Linked Discourses on Stream-Entry

## The Chapter at Bamboo Gate

### N 55.1 A Wheel-Turning Monarch *Cakkavattirājasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha ... said:

"Mendicants, suppose a wheel-turning monarch were to rule as sovereign
lord over these four continents. And when his body breaks up, after
death, he's reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of
the gods of the thirty-three. There he entertains himself in the Garden
of Delight, escorted by a band of nymphs, and supplied and provided with
the five kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation. Still, as he's lacking
four things, he's not exempt from hell, the animal realm, or the ghost
realm. He's not exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Now suppose a noble disciple wears rags and feeds on scraps of almsfood.
Still, as they have four things, they're exempt from hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm. They're exempt from places of loss, bad
places, the underworld.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.'

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.'

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.'

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

These are the four qualities that they have.

And, mendicants, gaining these four continents is not worth a sixteenth
part of gaining these four things."

### N 55.2 The Culmination of the Spiritual Life *Brahmacariyogadhasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer,
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Those who have faith and ethics,\
> confidence, and vision of the truth,\
> in time arrive at happiness,\
> the culmination of the spiritual life."

### N 55.3 With Dīghāvu *Dīghāvuupāsakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time the lay follower Dīghāvu was sick,
suffering, gravely ill. Then he addressed his father, the householder
Jotika, "Please, householder, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with
your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the lay follower
Dīghāvu is sick, suffering, gravely ill. He bows with his
head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please visit him at his home out
of sympathy.'"

"Yes, dear," replied Jotika. He did as Dīghāvu asked. The
Buddha consented with silence.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of the lay follower Dīghāvu, sat down on
the seat spread out, and said to him, "I hope you're keeping well,
Dīghāvu; I hope you're all right. I hope that your pain is
fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"So, Dīghāvu, you should train like this: 'I will have
experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... And I will have the ethical conduct loved by the
noble ones ... leading to immersion.' That's how you should train."

"Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha
are found in me, and I exhibit them. For I have experiential confidence
in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And I
have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to
immersion."

"In that case, Dīghāvu, grounded on these four factors of
stream-entry you should further develop these six things that play a
part in realization. You should meditate observing the impermanence of
all conditions, perceiving suffering in impermanence, perceiving
not-self in suffering, perceiving giving up, perceiving fading away, and
perceiving cessation. That's how you should train."

"These six things that play a part in realization that were taught by
the Buddha are found in me, and I exhibit them. For I meditate observing
the impermanence of all conditions, perceiving suffering in
impermanence, perceiving not-self in suffering, perceiving giving up,
perceiving fading away, and perceiving cessation.

But still, sir, I think, 'I hope Jotika doesn't suffer distress when
I've gone.'" Jotika said, "Dear Dīghāvu, don't focus on
that. Come on, dear Dīghāvu, you should closely focus on
what the Buddha is saying."

When the Buddha had given this advice he got up from his seat and left.
Not long after the Buddha left, Dīghāvu passed away. Then
several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, the lay follower named Dīghāvu, who was advised in
brief by the Buddha, has passed away. Where has he been reborn in his
next life?"

"Mendicants, the lay follower Dīghāvu was astute. He
practiced in line with the teachings, and did not trouble me about the
teachings. With the ending of the five lower fetters, he's been reborn
spontaneously, and will become extinguished there, not liable to return
from that world."

### N 55.4 With Sāriputta (1st) *Paṭhamasāriputtasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Ānanda came out of
retreat ... and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend, how many things do people have to possess in order for the
Buddha to declare that they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn
in the underworld, bound for awakening?"

"Reverend, people have to possess four things in order for the Buddha to
declare that they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion.
People have to possess these four things in order for the Buddha to
declare that they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 55.5 With Sāriputta (2nd) *Dutiyasāriputtasutta*

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down
to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Sāriputta, they speak of a 'factor of stream-entry'. What
is a factor of stream-entry?"

"Sir, the factors of stream-entry are associating with true persons,
listening to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and
practicing in line with the teaching."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For the factors of stream-entry are
associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational
application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching.

Sāriputta, they speak of 'the stream'. What is the stream?"

"Sir, the stream is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For the stream is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

Sāriputta, they speak of 'a stream-enterer'. What is a
stream-enterer?"

"Sir, anyone who possesses this noble eightfold path is called a
stream-enterer, the venerable of such and such name and clan."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For anyone who possesses this noble
eightfold path is called a stream-enterer, the venerable of such and
such name and clan."

### N 55.6 The Chamberlains *Thapatisutta*

At Sāvatthī. At that time several mendicants were making a
robe for the Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the
three months of the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out
wandering. Now at that time the chamberlains Isidatta and
Purāṇa were residing in Sādhuka on some
business. They heard about this.

So they posted someone on the road, saying:

"My good man, let us know when you see the Blessed One coming, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha." And that person stood there
for two or three days before they saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance. When they saw him, they went to the chamberlains and said:

"Sirs, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha is
coming. Please come at your convenience."

Then the chamberlains went up to the Buddha, bowed, and followed behind
him. And then the Buddha left the road, went to the root of a certain
tree, and sat down on the seat spread out. The master builders Isidatta
and Purāṇa bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha:

"Sir, when we hear that you will be setting out from
Sāvatthī to wander in the Kosalan lands, we're sad and
upset, thinking that you will be far from us. And when we hear that you
are setting out from Sāvatthī to wander in the Kosalan
lands, we're sad and upset, thinking that you are far from us.

And when we hear that you will be setting out from the Kosalan lands to
wander in the Mallian lands, we're sad and upset, thinking that you will
be far from us. And when we hear that you are setting out from the
Kosalan lands to wander in the Mallian lands, we're sad and upset,
thinking that you are far from us.

And when we hear that you will be setting out from the Mallian lands to
wander in the Vajjian lands ...

you will be setting out from the Vajjian lands to wander in the
Kāsian lands ...

you will be setting out from the Kāsian lands to wander in
the Magadhan lands ...

you are setting out from the Kāsian lands to wander in the
Magadhan lands, we're sad and upset, thinking that you are far from us.

But when we hear that you will be setting out from the Magadhan lands to
wander in the Kāsian lands, we're happy and joyful,
thinking that you will be near to us. And when we hear that you are
setting out from the Magadhan lands to wander in the Kāsian
lands ...

you will be setting out from the Kāsian lands to wander in
the Vajjian lands ...

you will be setting out from the Vajjian lands to wander in the Mallian
lands ...

you will be setting out from the Mallian lands to wander in the Kosalan
lands ...

you will be setting out in the Kosalan lands to wander to
Sāvatthī, we're happy and joyful, thinking that you will be
near to us.

And when we hear that you are staying near Sāvatthī in
Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery we have no little
happiness and joy, thinking that you are near to us."

"Well then, chamberlains, life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone
forth is wide open. Just this much is enough to be diligent."

"Sir, for us there is something that's even more cramped than that, and
is considered as such."

"What is that?"

"Sir, it's when King Pasenadi of Kosala wants to go and visit a park. We
have to harness and prepare his royal elephants. Then we have to seat
his dear and beloved wives on the elephants, one in front of us, and one
behind. Those sisters smell like a freshly opened perfume box; that's
how the royal ladies smell with makeup on. The touch of those sisters is
like a tuft of cotton-wool or kapok; that's how dainty the royal ladies
are. Now at that time we must look after the elephants, the sisters, and
ourselves. But we don't recall having a bad thought regarding those
sisters. This is that thing that's even more cramped than that, and is
considered as such."

"Well then, chamberlains, life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone
forth is wide open. Just this much is enough to be diligent. A noble
disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They live at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share. A
noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

And you have experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
the Saṅgha ... And whatever there is in your family that's
available to give, you share it all with those who are ethical, of good
character.

What do you think, chamberlains? How many people among the Kosalans are
your equal when it comes to giving and sharing?"

"We're fortunate, sir, so very fortunate, in that the Buddha understands
us like this."

### N 55.7 The People of Bamboo Gate *Veḷudvāreyyasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Bamboo Gate. The brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Bamboo Gate, together with a large
Saṅgha of mendicants. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods,
Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to others. He
proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to see such
perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate went up to the Buddha.
Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings
and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the
Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.
Seated to one side they said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, these are our wishes, desires, and hopes. We wish to
live at home with our children; to use sandalwood imported from
Kāsi; to wear garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and to
accept gold and currency. And when our body breaks up, after death, we
wish to be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. Given that we have
such wishes, may the Buddha teach us the Dhamma so that we may achieve
them."

"Householders, I will teach you an explanation of the Dhamma that
applies to oneself. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the explanation of the Dhamma that applies to oneself?

It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'I want to live and don't want to
die; I want to be happy and recoil from pain. Since this is so, if
someone were to take my life, I wouldn't like that. But others also want
to live and don't want to die; they want to be happy and recoil from
pain. So if I were to take the life of someone else, they wouldn't like
that either. The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by
others. Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on someone
else?' Reflecting in this way, they give up killing living creatures
themselves. And they encourage others to give up killing living
creatures, praising the giving up of killing living creatures. So their
bodily behavior is purified in three points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to steal from
me, I wouldn't like that. But if I were to steal from someone else, they
wouldn't like that either. The thing that is disliked by me is also
disliked by others. Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on
someone else?' Reflecting in this way, they give up stealing themselves.
And they encourage others to give up stealing, praising the giving up of
stealing. So their bodily behavior is purified in three points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to have sexual
relations with my wives, I wouldn't like it. But if I were to have
sexual relations with someone else's wives, he wouldn't like that
either. The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by others.
Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on others?' Reflecting
in this way, they give up sexual misconduct themselves. And they
encourage others to give up sexual misconduct, praising the giving up of
sexual misconduct. So their bodily behavior is purified in three points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to distort my
meaning by lying, I wouldn't like it. But if I were to distort someone
else's meaning by lying, they wouldn't like it either. The thing that is
disliked by me is also disliked by someone else. Since I dislike this
thing, how can I inflict it on others?' Reflecting in this way, they
give up lying themselves. And they encourage others to give up lying,
praising the giving up of lying. So their verbal behavior is purified in
three points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to break me up
from my friends by divisive speech, I wouldn't like it. But if I were to
break someone else from their friends by divisive speech, they wouldn't
like it either. ...' So their verbal behavior is purified in three
points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to attack me
with harsh speech, I wouldn't like it. But if I were to attack someone
else with harsh speech, they wouldn't like it either. ...' So their
verbal behavior is purified in three points.

Furthermore, a noble disciple reflects: 'If someone were to annoy me by
talking silliness and nonsense, I wouldn't like it. But if I were to
annoy someone else by talking silliness and nonsense, they wouldn't like
it either.' The thing that is disliked by me is also disliked by
another. Since I dislike this thing, how can I inflict it on another?'
Reflecting in this way, they give up talking nonsense themselves. And
they encourage others to give up talking nonsense, praising the giving
up of talking nonsense. So their verbal behavior is purified in three
points.

And they have experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical conduct loved by
the noble ones ... leading to immersion. When a noble disciple has these
seven good qualities and these four desirable states they may, if they
wish, declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

When he had spoken, the brahmins and householders of Bamboo Gate said to
the Buddha, "Excellent, worthy Gotama! ... We go for refuge to the
worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the worthy Gotama remember
us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

### N 55.8 In the Brick Hall (1st) *Paṭhamagiñjakāvasathasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying at
Ñātika in the brick house. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, the monk named Sāḷha has passed away. Where has he
been reborn in his next life? The nun named Nandā, the
layman named Sudatta, and the laywoman named Sujātā have
passed away. Where have they been reborn in the next life?"

"Ānanda, the monk Sāḷha passed away having realized the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life,
having realized it with his own insight due to the ending of
defilements.

The nun Nandā passed away having ended the five lower
fetters. She's been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished
there, not liable to return from that world.

The layman Sudatta passed away having ended three fetters, and weakened
greed, hate, and delusion. He's a once-returner; he will come back to
this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

The laywoman Sujātā passed away having ended three fetters.
She's a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound
for awakening.

It's no wonder that a human being should pass away. But if you should
come and ask me about it each and every time someone dies that would be
a bother for me. So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the
Dhamma called 'the mirror of the teaching'. A noble disciple who has
this may declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what is that mirror of the teaching?

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. This is that
mirror of the teaching. A noble disciple who has this may declare of
themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and
the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places, the
underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

**(The following two discourses have the same setting.)**

### N 55.9 At the Brick Hall (2nd) *Dutiyagiñjakāvasathasutta*

Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, the monk named Asoka has passed away. Where has he been reborn in
his next life? The nun named Asokā, the layman named Asoka,
and the laywoman named Asokā have passed away. Where have
they been reborn in the next life?"

"Ānanda, the monk Asoka passed away having realized the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life ...

**(And all is explained as in SN 55.8.)**

This is that mirror of the teaching. A noble disciple who has this may
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

### N 55.10 At the Brick Hall (3rd) *Tatiyagiñjakāvasathasutta*

Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, the layman named Kakkaṭa has passed away in
Ñātika. Where has he been reborn in his next life? The
laymen named Kaḷibha, Nikata, Kaṭissaha,
Tuṭṭha, Santuṭṭha, Bhadda, and Subhadda have
passed away in Ñātika. Where have they been reborn in the
next life?"

"Ānanda, the laymen Kakkaṭa, Kaḷibha, Nikata,
Kaṭissaha, Tuṭṭha, Santuṭṭha,
Bhadda, and Subhadda passed away having ended the five lower fetters.
They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not
liable to return from that world.

Over fifty laymen in Ñātika have passed away having ended
the five lower fetters. They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be
extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

More than ninety laymen in Ñātika have passed away having
ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They're
once-returners, who will come back to this world once only, then make an
end of suffering.

More than five hundred laymen in Ñātika have passed away
having ended three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

It's no wonder that a human being should pass away. But if you should
come and ask me about it each and every time someone passes away, that
would be a bother for me. So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of
the Dhamma called 'the mirror of the teaching'. A noble disciple who has
this may declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what is that mirror of the teaching?

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. This is that
mirror of the teaching. A noble disciple who has this may declare of
themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and
the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places, the
underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

## The Chapter on the Royal Monastery

### N 55.11 A Saṅgha of a Thousand Nuns *Sahassabhikkhunisaṁghasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the
Royal Monastery. Then a Saṅgha of a thousand nuns went up
to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The Buddha said to them:

"Nuns, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. What four?
It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A noble
disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 55.12 The Brahmins *Brāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī. "Mendicants, the brahmins advocate a practice
called 'get up and go'. They encourage their disciples: 'Please, good
people, rising early you should face east and walk. Do not avoid a pit,
a cliff, a stump, thorny ground, a swamp, or a sewer. You should await
death in the place that you fall. And when your body breaks up, after
death, you'll be reborn in a good place, a heaven realm.'

But this practice of the brahmins is a foolish procedure, a stupid
procedure. It doesn't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, or extinguishment. But in the training of the
Noble One I advocate a 'get up and go' practice which does lead solely
to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening,
and extinguishment.

And what is that 'get up and go' practice? It's when a noble disciple
has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical conduct loved by the
noble ones ... leading to immersion. This is that 'get up and go'
practice which does lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

### N 55.13 With the Senior Monk Ānanda *Ānandattherasutta*

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Sāriputta were
staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove,
Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then in the late afternoon,
Venerable Sāriputta came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Reverend, how many things do people have to give up and how many do
they have to possess in order for the Buddha to declare that they're a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

"Reverend, people have to give up four things and possess four things in
order for the Buddha to declare that they're a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? They don't have the distrust in the Buddha that causes an
unlearned ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up,
after death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And
they do have the experiential confidence in the Buddha that causes a
learned noble disciple to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after
death---in a good place, a heavenly realm. 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They don't have the distrust in the teaching that causes an unlearned
ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after
death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they
do have the experiential confidence in the teaching that causes a
learned noble disciple to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after
death---in a good place, a heavenly realm. 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.'

They don't have the distrust in the Saṅgha that causes an
unlearned ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up,
after death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And
they do have the experiential confidence in the Saṅgha that
causes a learned noble disciple to be reborn---when their body breaks
up, after death---in a good place, a heavenly realm. 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration
with joined palms.'

They don't have the unethical conduct that causes an unlearned ordinary
person to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after death---in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And they do have the
ethical conduct loved by the noble ones that causes a learned noble
disciple to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after death---in a
good place, a heavenly realm. Their ethical conduct is loved by the
noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.
People have to give up these four things and possess these four things
in order for the Buddha to declare that they're a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 55.14 Fear of the Bad Place *Duggatibhayasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things has gone beyond all
fear of being reborn in a bad place. What four? It's when a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical conduct loved by
the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A noble disciple who has these
four things has gone beyond all fear of being reborn in a bad place."

### N 55.15 Fear of the Bad Place, the Underworld *Duggativinipātabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things has gone beyond all
fear of being reborn in a bad place, the underworld. What four? It's
when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A noble
disciple who has these four things has gone beyond all fear of being
reborn in a bad place, the underworld."

### N 55.16 Friends and Colleagues (1st) *Paṭhamamittāmaccasutta*

"Mendicants, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in the four factors of
stream-entry. What four? Experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And the ethical conduct loved
by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. Those who you have sympathy
for, and those worth listening to---friends and colleagues, relatives
and family---should be encouraged, supported, and established in these
four factors of stream-entry."

### N 55.17 Friends and Colleagues (2nd) *Dutiyamittāmaccasutta*

"Mendicants, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in the four factors of
stream-entry. What four? Experiential confidence in the Buddha ...

There might be change in the four principal states---the elements of
earth, water, fire, and air---but a noble disciple with experiential
confidence in the Buddha would never change. In this context, 'change'
means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible.

Experiential confidence in the teaching ...

Experiential confidence in the Saṅgha ...

The ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion.
There might be change in the four principal states---the elements of
earth, water, fire, and air---but a noble disciple with the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones would never change. In this context,
'change' means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the
animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible.

Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to---friends
and colleagues, relatives and family---should be encouraged, supported,
and established in these four factors of stream-entry."

### N 55.18 A Visit to the Gods (1st) *Paṭhamadevacārikasutta*

At Sāvatthī. And then Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong person would extend
or contract their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared among
the gods of the thirty-three. Then several deities of the company of the
thirty-three went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, bowed,
and stood to one side. Moggallāna said to them:

"Reverends, it's good to have experiential confidence in the Buddha. ...
It's the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It's good to
have experiential confidence in the teaching. ... the
Saṅgha ... and to have the ethical conduct that's loved by
the noble ones ... leading to immersion. It's the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm."

"My good Moggallāna, it's good to have experiential
confidence in the Buddha ... It's the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. It's good to have experiential confidence in the
teaching. ... the Saṅgha ... and to have the ethical
conduct that's loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. It's
the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

### N 55.19 A Visit to the Gods (2nd) *Dutiyadevacārikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong
person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove
and reappeared among the gods of the thirty-three. Then several deities
of the company of the thirty-three went up to Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna, bowed, and stood to one side.
Moggallāna said to them:

"Reverends, it's good to have experiential confidence in the Buddha. ...
It's the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, have been reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It's
good to have experiential confidence in the teaching. ... the
Saṅgha ... and to have the ethical conduct that's loved by
the noble ones ... leading to immersion. It's the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, have been
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"My good Moggallāna, it's good to have experiential
confidence in the Buddha ... It's the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, have been reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. It's good to have experiential confidence in
the teaching. ... the Saṅgha ... and to have the ethical
conduct that's loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. It's
the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, have been reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

### N 55.20 A Visit to the Gods (3rd) *Tatiyadevacārikasutta*

Then the Buddha, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared among the gods of
the thirty-three. Then several deities of the company of the
thirty-three went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The
Buddha said to them:

"Reverends, it's good to have experiential confidence in the Buddha. ...
It's the reason why some sentient beings are stream-enterers, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. It's good to have
experiential confidence in the teaching. ... the Saṅgha ...
and to have the ethical conduct that's loved by the noble ones ...
leading to immersion. It's the reason why some sentient beings are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

"Good fellow, it's good to have experiential confidence in the Buddha
... It's the reason why some sentient beings are stream-enterers, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. It's good to
have experiential confidence in the teaching. ... the
Saṅgha ... and to have the ethical conduct that's loved by
the noble ones ... leading to immersion. It's the reason why some
sentient beings are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening."

## The Chapter with Sarakāni

### N 55.21 With Mahānāma (1st) *Paṭhamamahānāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, this Kapilavatthu is successful and prosperous, populous, full of
people, with cramped cul-de-sacs. In the late afternoon, after paying
homage to the Buddha or an esteemed mendicant, I enter Kapilavatthu. I
encounter a stray elephant, horse, chariot, cart, or person. At that
time I lose mindfulness regarding the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha. I think: 'If I were to die at this time, where
would I be reborn in my next life?'"

"Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear! Your death will not be
a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one. Take someone whose mind
has for a long time been imbued with faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. Their body is formed, made up of the four
principal states, produced by mother and father, built up from rice and
porridge, liable to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to
breaking up and destruction. Right here the crows, vultures, hawks,
dogs, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures devour it. But their
mind rises up, headed for a higher place.

Suppose a person was to sink a pot of ghee or oil into a deep lake and
break it open. Its shards and chips would sink down, while the ghee or
oil in it would rise up, headed for a higher place.

In the same way, take someone whose mind has for a long time been imbued
with faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Their body
consists of form, made up of the four principal states, produced by
mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to
impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and
destruction. Right here the crows, vultures, hawks, dogs, jackals, and
many kinds of little creatures devour it. But their mind rises up,
headed for a higher place.

Your mind, Mahānāma, has for a long time been imbued with
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. Do not fear,
Mahānāma, do not fear! Your death will not be a bad one;
your passing will not be a bad one."

### N 55.22 With Mahānāma (2nd) *Dutiyamahānāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.
Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, this Kapilavatthu is successful and prosperous, populous, full of
people, with cramped cul-de-sacs. In the late afternoon, after paying
homage to the Buddha or an esteemed mendicant, I enter Kapilavatthu. I
encounter a stray elephant, horse, chariot, cart, or person. At that
time I lose mindfulness regarding the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha. I think: 'If I were to die at this time, where
would I be reborn in my next life?'"

"Do not fear, Mahānāma, do not fear! Your death will not be
a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one. A noble disciple who has
four things slants, slopes, and inclines towards extinguishment. What
four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion.

Suppose there was a tree that slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
If it was cut off at the root where would it fall?"

"Sir, it would fall in the direction that it slants, slopes, and
inclines."

"In the same way, a noble disciple who has four things slants, slopes,
and inclines towards extinguishment."

### N 55.23 With Godhā the Sakyan *Godhasakkasutta*

At Kapilavatthu. Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to
Godhā the Sakyan, and said to him, "Godhā, how
many things must a person have for you to recognize them as a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

"Mahānāma, a person must have three things for me to
recognize them as a stream-enterer. What three? It's when a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
and the Saṅgha ... When a person has these three things I
recognize them as a stream-enterer.

But Mahānāma, how many things must a person have for *you*
to recognize them as a stream-enterer?"

"Godhā, a person must have four things for me to recognize
them as a stream-enterer. What four? It's when a noble disciple has
experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical conduct loved by the
noble ones ... leading to immersion. When a person has these four things
I recognize them as a stream-enterer."

"Hold on, Mahānāma, hold on! Only the Buddha would know
whether or not they have these things."

"Come, Godhā, let's go to the Buddha and inform him about
this."

Then Mahānāma and Godhā went to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. Mahānāma told the Buddha
all that had happened, and then said:

"Sir, some issue regarding the teaching might come up. The Buddha might
take one side, and the Saṅgha of monks the other. I'd side
with the Buddha. May the Buddha remember me as having such confidence.
Some issue regarding the teaching might come up. The Buddha might take
one side, and the Saṅgha of monks and the
Saṅgha of nuns the other. ... The Buddha might take one
side, and the Saṅgha of monks and the Saṅgha
of nuns and the laymen the other. ... The Buddha might take one side,
and the Saṅgha of monks and the Saṅgha of nuns
and the laymen and the laywomen the other. ... The Buddha might take one
side, and the Saṅgha of monks and the Saṅgha
of nuns and the laymen and the laywomen and the world---with its gods,
Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, gods and humans---the other. I'd side with the Buddha. May
the Buddha remember me as having such confidence."

"Godhā, what do you have to say to Mahānāma
when he speaks like this?"

"Sir, I have nothing to say to Mahānāma when he speaks like
this, except what is good and wholesome."

### N 55.24 About Sarakāni (1st) *Paṭhamasaraṇānisakkasutta*

At Kapilavatthu.

Now at that time Sarakāni the Sakyan had passed away. The
Buddha declared that he was a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening.

At that, several Sakyans came together complaining, grumbling, and
objecting, "Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! Who can't become a
stream-enterer these days? For the Buddha even declared
Sarakāni to be a stream-enterer after he passed away.
Sarakāni was too weak for the training; he used to drink
liquor."

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said:

"Mahānāma, when a lay follower has for a long time gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, how
could they go to the underworld? And if anyone should rightly be said to
have for a long time gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, it's Sarakāni the Sakyan.
Sarakāni the Sakyan has for a long time gone for refuge to
the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha. How could he go
to the underworld?

Take a certain person who has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They have laughing wisdom
and swift wisdom, and are endowed with freedom. They've realized the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This person is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the
ghost realm. They're exempt from places of loss, bad places, the
underworld.

Take another person who has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They have laughing wisdom
and swift wisdom, but are not endowed with freedom. With the ending of
the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
person, too, is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm.
They're exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... But they don't have
laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. With
the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and
delusion, they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once
only, then make an end of suffering. This person, too, is exempt from
hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're exempt from places
of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... But they don't have
laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. With
the ending of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. This person, too, is
exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're exempt
from places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who doesn't have experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They don't have
laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom.
Still, they have these qualities: the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they accept the teachings
proclaimed by the Realized One after deliberating them with a degree of
wisdom. This person, too, doesn't go to hell, the animal realm, and the
ghost realm. They don't go to places of loss, bad places, the
underworld.

Take another person who doesn't have experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They don't have
laughing wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom.
Still, they have these qualities: the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they have a degree of faith and
love for the Buddha. This person, too, doesn't go to hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. They don't go to places of loss, bad places,
the underworld.

If these great sal trees could understand what was well said and poorly
said, I'd declare them to be stream-enterers. Why can't this apply to
Sarakāni? Mahānāma, Sarakāni the
Sakyan undertook the training at the time of his death."

### N 55.25 About Sarakāni the Sakyan (2nd) *Dutiyasaraṇānisakkasutta*

At Kapilavatthu.

Now at that time Sarakāni the Sakyan had passed away. The
Buddha declared that he was a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening.

At that, several Sakyans came together complaining, grumbling, and
objecting, "Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! Who can't become a
stream-enterer these days? For the Buddha even declared
Sarakāni to be a stream-enterer after he passed away.
Sarakāni didn't fulfill the training."

Then Mahānāma the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him what had happened. The Buddha said:

"Mahānāma, when a lay follower has for a long time gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, how
could they go to the underworld? And if anyone should rightly be said to
have for a long time gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, it's Sarakāni the Sakyan.
Sarakāni the Sakyan has for a long time gone for refuge to
the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha.

Take a certain person who is sure and devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They have laughing wisdom and
swift wisdom, and are endowed with freedom. They realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This person is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the
ghost realm. They're exempt from places of loss, bad places, the
underworld.

Take another person who is sure and devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They have laughing wisdom and
swift wisdom, but are not endowed with freedom. With the ending of the
five lower fetters, they're extinguished between one life and the next
... they're extinguished upon landing ... they're extinguished without
extra effort ... they're extinguished with extra effort ... they head
upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm. This person, too,
is exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're
exempt from places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who is sure and devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... But they don't have laughing
wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. With the
ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then
make an end of suffering. This person, too, is exempt from hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're exempt from places of loss,
bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who is sure and devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... But they don't have laughing
wisdom or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. With the
ending of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. This person, too, is
exempt from hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They're exempt
from places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who isn't sure or devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They don't have laughing wisdom
or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. Still, they have
these qualities: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion,
and wisdom. And they accept the teachings proclaimed by the Realized One
after deliberating them with a degree of wisdom. This person, too,
doesn't go to hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. They don't go
to places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Take another person who isn't sure or devoted to the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... They don't have laughing wisdom
or swift wisdom, nor are they endowed with freedom. Still, they have
these qualities: the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion,
and wisdom. And they have a degree of faith and love for the Buddha.
This person, too, doesn't go to hell, the animal realm, and the ghost
realm. They don't go to places of loss, bad places, the underworld.

Suppose there was a barren field, a barren ground, with uncleared
stumps. And you had seeds that were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged,
infertile, and ill kept. And the heavens didn't provide enough rain.
Would those seeds grow, increase, and mature?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, take a teaching that's badly explained and badly
propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. This is what I call a barren
field. A disciple remains in such a teaching, practicing in line with
that teaching, practicing it properly, living in line with that
teaching. This is what I call a bad seed.

Suppose there was a fertile field, a fertile ground, well-cleared of
stumps. And you had seeds that were intact, unspoiled, not
weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And there's plenty of rainfall.
Would those seeds grow, increase, and mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, take a teaching that's well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
a fully awakened Buddha. This is what I call a fertile field. A disciple
remains in such a teaching, practicing in line with that teaching,
practicing it properly, living in line with that teaching. This is what
I call a good seed. Why can't this apply to Sarakāni?
Mahānāma, Sarakāni the Sakyan fulfilled the
training at the time of his death."

### N 55.26 Anāthapiṇḍika (1st) *Paṭhamaanāthapiṇḍikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍika was sick,
suffering, gravely ill. Then he addressed a man, "Please, worthy man, go
to Venerable Sāriputta, and in my name bow with your head
to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika is sick, suffering, gravely ill. He bows with
his head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please visit him at his home
out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Anāthapiṇḍika
asked. Sāriputta consented with silence.

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went with Venerable Ānanda as his second monk
to Anāthapiṇḍika's home. He sat down on the seat spread
out, and said to Anāthapiṇḍika, "I hope you're keeping
well, householder; I hope you're all right. And I hope the pain is
fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"Householder, you don't have the distrust in the Buddha that causes an
unlearned ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up,
after death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And
you have experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' Seeing in
yourself that experiential confidence in the Buddha, that pain may die
down on the spot.

You don't have the distrust in the teaching that causes an unlearned
ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after
death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And you
have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' Seeing in yourself that experiential confidence
in the teaching, that pain may die down on the spot.

You don't have the distrust in the Saṅgha that causes an
unlearned ordinary person to be reborn---when their body breaks up,
after death---in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. And
you have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration
with joined palms. It is the supreme field of merit for the world.'
Seeing in yourself that experiential confidence in the
Saṅgha, that pain may die down on the spot.

You don't have the unethical conduct that causes an unlearned ordinary
person to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after death---in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. Your ethical conduct
is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. Seeing in yourself that ethical conduct loved by
the noble ones, that pain may die down on the spot.

You don't have the wrong view that causes an unlearned ordinary person
to be reborn---when their body breaks up, after death---in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. You have right view. Seeing in
yourself that right view, that pain may die down on the spot.

You don't have the wrong thought ...

wrong speech ...

wrong action ...

wrong livelihood ...

wrong effort ...

wrong mindfulness ...

wrong immersion ...

wrong knowledge ...

wrong freedom ... You have right freedom. Seeing in yourself that right
freedom, that pain may die down on the spot."

And then Anāthapiṇḍika's pain died down on the spot. Then
he served Sāriputta and Ānanda from his own dish. When
Sāriputta had eaten and washed his hand and bowl,
Anāthapiṇḍika took a low seat and sat to one side.
Venerable Sāriputta expressed his appreciation to him with
these verses.

> "Whoever has faith in the Realized One,\
> unwavering and well grounded;\
> whose ethical conduct is good,\
> praised and loved by the noble ones;
>
> who has confidence in the Saṅgha,\
> and correct view:\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behaviour,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

After expressing his appreciation to Anāthapiṇḍika with
these verses, Sāriputta got up from his seat and left.

Then Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to him, "So, Ānanda, where are you coming from in the middle
of the day?"

"Sir, Venerable Sāriputta advised the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika in this way and that."

"Sāriputta is astute, Ānanda. He has great wisdom, since he
can analyze the four factors of stream-entry in ten respects."

### N 55.27 With Anāthapiṇḍika (2nd) *Dutiyaanāthapiṇḍikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time the householder Anāthapiṇḍika was sick,
suffering, gravely ill. Then he addressed a man, "Please, worthy man, go
to Venerable Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say
to him: 'Sir, the householder Anāthapiṇḍika is sick,
suffering, gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' And then
say: 'Sir, please visit him at his home out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," that man replied. He did as Anāthapiṇḍika
asked. Ānanda consented with silence.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of the householder Anāthapiṇḍika. He
sat down on the seat spread out and said to Anāthapiṇḍika,
"I hope you're keeping well, householder; I hope you're all right. And I
hope the pain is fading, not growing; that its fading, not its growing,
is apparent."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"Householder, when an unlearned ordinary person has four things, they're
frightened and terrified, and fear what awaits them after death. What
four? Firstly, an unlearned ordinary person distrusts the Buddha. Seeing
in themselves that distrust of the Buddha, they're frightened and
terrified, and fear what awaits them after death.

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person distrusts the teaching ...

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person distrusts the
Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person has unethical conduct. Seeing
in themselves that unethical conduct, they're frightened and terrified,
and fear what awaits them after death. When an unlearned ordinary person
has these four things, they're frightened and terrified, and fear what
awaits them after death.

When a learned noble disciple has four things, they're not frightened or
terrified, and don't fear what awaits them after death. What four?
Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
Seeing in themselves that experiential confidence in the Buddha, they're
not frightened or terrified, and don't fear what awaits them after
death.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. Seeing in
themselves that ethical conduct loved by the noble ones, they're not
frightened or terrified, and don't fear what awaits them after death.

When a learned noble disciple has these four things, they're not
frightened or terrified, and don't fear what awaits them after death."

"Honorable Ānanda, I am not afraid. What have I to fear? For I have
experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... And of the training rules appropriate for
laypeople taught by the Buddha, I don't see any that I have broken."

"You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate! You have declared the
fruit of stream-entry."

### N 55.28 Dangers and Threats (1st) *Paṭhamabhayaverūpasantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika:

"Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and
threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and
comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in this life and
in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. So that
danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from killing living
creatures. Anyone who steals ... Anyone who commits sexual misconduct
... Anyone who lies ... Anyone who consumes beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants creates dangers and threats both in this life and in lives
to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. So that danger and
threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. These are the
four factors of stream-entry that they have.

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and
comprehended with wisdom? A noble disciple rationally applies the mind
to dependent origination itself: 'When this exists, that is; due to the
arising of this, that arises. When this doesn't exist, that is not; due
to the cessation of this, that ceases.' That is: Ignorance is a
condition for choices. Choices are a condition for consciousness.
Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are a
condition for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions
for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition
for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this
entire mass of suffering originates. When ignorance fades away and
ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease,
consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense
fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When
feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the noble system that
they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom.

When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four
factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble
system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: 'I've
finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm.
I've finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am
a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am
bound for awakening.'"

### N 55.29 Dangers and Threats (2nd) *Dutiyabhayaverūpasantasutta*

At Sāvatthī. ... "Mendicants, when a noble disciple has
quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry,
and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they
may, if they wish, declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in
hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all
places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

### N 55.30 With Nandaka the Licchavi *Nandakalicchavisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then Nandaka the Licchavi
chief minister went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.
The Buddha said to him:

"Nandaka, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. What four?
It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ...
the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A noble
disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

A noble disciple who has these four things is guaranteed long life, both
human and heavenly ... beauty ... happiness ... fame ... and
sovereignty, both human and heavenly. Now, I don't say this because I've
heard it from some other ascetic or brahmin. I only say it because I've
known, seen, and realized it for myself."

When he had spoken, a certain person said to Nandaka:

"Sir, it is time to bathe."

"Enough now, my man, with that exterior bath. This interior bathing will
do for me, that is, confidence in the Buddha."

## The Chapter on Overflowing Merit

### N 55.31 Overflowing Merit (1st) *Paṭhamapuññābhisandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? Firstly, a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... This is the first
kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... This is the second kind of overflowing merit, overflowing
goodness that nurtures happiness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Saṅgha ... This is the third kind of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness.

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This is the
fourth kind of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures
happiness. These are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing
goodness that nurture happiness."

### N 55.32 Overflowing Merit (2nd) *Dutiyapuññābhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of
stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to
charity, loving to give and to share. This is the fourth kind of
overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. These
are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that
nurture happiness."

### N 55.33 Overflowing Merit (3rd) *Tatiyapuññābhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising
and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. These are the four kinds
of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness."

### N 55.34 Footprints of the Gods (1st) *Paṭhamadevapadasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these four footprints of the gods are in order to purify
unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.

What four? Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... This is the first footprint of the gods in order to purify
unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This is the
fourth footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and
cleanse unclean beings. These four footprints of the gods are in order
to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings."

### N 55.35 Footprints of the Gods (2nd) *Dutiyadevapadasutta*

"Mendicants, these four footprints of the gods are in order to purify
unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings.

What four? Firstly, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.' Then they reflect: 'What now is the footprint of the
gods?' They understand: 'I hear that these days the gods consider
non-harming to be supreme. But I don't hurt any creature firm or frail.
I definitely live in possession of a footprint of the gods.' This is the
first footprint of the gods in order to purify unpurified beings and
cleanse unclean beings.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. Then they
reflect: 'What now is the footprint of the gods?' They understand: 'I
hear that these days the gods consider non-harming to be supreme. But I
don't hurt any creature firm or frail. I definitely live in possession
of a footprint of the gods.' This is the fourth footprint of the gods in
order to purify unpurified beings and cleanse unclean beings. These four
footprints of the gods are in order to purify unpurified beings and
cleanse unclean beings."

### N 55.36 In Common With the Gods *Devasabhāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, when someone has four things the gods are pleased and speak
of what they have in common. What four? Firstly, a noble disciple has
experiential confidence in the Buddha ... There are deities with
experiential confidence in the Buddha who passed away from here and were
reborn there. They think: 'Having such experiential confidence in the
Buddha, we passed away from there and were reborn here. That noble
disciple has the same kind of experiential confidence in the Buddha, so
they will come into the presence of the gods.'

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. There are
deities with the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones who passed away
from here and were reborn there. They think: 'Having such ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones, we passed away from there and were
reborn here. That noble disciple has the same kind of ethical conduct
loved by the noble ones, so they will come into the presence of the
gods.' When someone has four things the gods are pleased and speak of
what they have in common."

### N 55.37 With Mahānāma *Mahānāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahānāma
the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him:

"Sir, how is a lay follower defined?"

"Mahānāma, when you've gone for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha, you're considered to be a lay
follower."

"But how is an ethical lay follower defined?"

"When a lay follower doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants, they're
considered to be an ethical lay follower."

"But how is a faithful lay follower defined?"

"It's when a lay follower has faith in the Realized One's awakening:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
Then they're considered to be a faithful lay follower."

"But how is a generous lay follower defined?"

"It's when a lay follower lives at home rid of the stain of stinginess,
freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity,
loving to give and to share. Then they're considered to be a generous
lay follower."

"But how is a wise lay follower defined?"

"It's when a lay follower is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. Then they're considered to be a wise lay follower."

### N 55.38 Rain *Vassasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the
water flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they
become full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the
lakes fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as
the rivers become full, they fill up the ocean. In the same way, a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and
the Saṅgha, and the ethics loved by the noble ones. These
things flow onwards; and, after crossing to the far shore, they lead to
the ending of defilements."

### N 55.39 With Kāḷigodhā *Kāḷigodhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then the Buddha robed up in
the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of
Kāḷigodhā the Sakyan lady, where he sat on the seat spread
out. Then Kāḷigodhā went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to her:

"Godhā, a female noble disciple who has four things is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening. What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential
confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... And they live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share. A female noble disciple who has these four things is
a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

"Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha
are found in me, and I exhibit them. For I have experiential confidence
in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And I
share without reservation all the gifts available to give in our family
with those who are ethical and of good character."

"You're fortunate, Godhā, so very fortunate, You have
declared the fruit of stream-entry."

### N 55.40 Nandiya the Sakyan *Nandiyasakkasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Nandiya the Sakyan went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, if a noble disciple were to totally and utterly lack the four
factors of stream-entry, would they live negligently?"

"Nandiya, someone who totally and utterly lacks these four factors of
stream-entry is an outsider who belongs with the ordinary persons, I
say. Neverthless, Nandiya, as to how a noble disciple lives negligently
and how they live diligently, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," Nandiya replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how does a noble disciple live negligently? Firstly, a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... They're content
with that confidence, and don't make a further effort for solitude by
day or retreat by night. When they live negligently, there's no joy.
When there's no joy, there's no rapture. When there's no rapture,
there's no tranquility. When there's no tranquility, there's suffering.
When one is suffering, the mind does not become immersed in
samādhi. When the mind is not immersed in
samādhi, principles do not become clear. Because principles
have not become clear, they're reckoned to live negligently.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. They're
content with that ethical conduct loved by the noble ones, and don't
make a further effort for solitude by day or retreat by night. When they
live negligently, there's no joy. When there's no joy, there's no
rapture. When there's no rapture, there's no tranquility. When there's
no tranquility, there's suffering. When one is suffering, the mind does
not become immersed in samādhi. When the mind is not
immersed in samādhi, principles do not become clear.
Because principles have not become clear, they're reckoned to live
negligently. That's how a noble disciple lives negligently.

And how does a noble disciple live diligently? Firstly, a noble disciple
has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... But they're not content
with that confidence, and make a further effort for solitude by day and
retreat by night. When they live diligently, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. When the
mind is immersed in samādhi, principles become clear.
Because principles have become clear, they're reckoned to live
diligently.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have the ethical
conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. But they're
not content with that ethical conduct loved by the noble ones, and make
a further effort for solitude by day and retreat by night. When they
live diligently, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When
the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. When the mind is immersed in
samādhi, principles become clear. Because principles have
become clear, they're reckoned to live diligently. That's how a noble
disciple lives diligently."

## The Chapter on Overflowing Merit, With Verses

### N 55.41 Overflowing Merit (1st) *Paṭhamaabhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, they have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ...
leading to immersion. ... These are the four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.

When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying
that this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness
that nurtures happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of merit.

It's like trying to measure how much water is in the ocean. It's not
easy to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of
thousands of gallons there are. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of water.

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of
overflowing merit and goodness, it's not easy to measure how much merit
they have by saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. It's simply reckoned as an
incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Hosts of people use the rivers,\
> and though the rivers are many,\
> all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,\
> the cruel sea that's home to precious gems.
>
> So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes;\
> and they're a giver of beds, seats, and mats---\
> the streams of merit reach that astute person,\
> as the rivers bring their waters to the sea."

### N 55.42 Overflowing Merit (2nd) *Dutiyaabhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple lives at home rid of the stain of
stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to
charity, loving to give and to share. This is the fourth kind of
overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. These
are the four kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that
nurture happiness.

When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying
that this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness
that nurtures happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of merit.

There are places where the great rivers---the Ganges, Yamuna,
Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---come together and converge. It's not easy to measure
how much water is in such places by saying how many gallons, how many
hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands of gallons there are. It's
simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water.

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these four kinds of
overflowing merit and goodness, it's not easy to measure how much merit
they have by saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. It's simply reckoned as an
incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Hosts of people use the rivers,\
> and though the rivers are many,\
> all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,\
> the cruel sea that's home to precious gems.
>
> So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes;\
> and they're a giver of beds, seats, and mats---\
> the streams of merit reach that astute person,\
> as the rivers bring their waters to the sea."

### N 55.43 Overflowing Merit (3rd) *Tatiyaabhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurture happiness. What four? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising
and passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fourth kind of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness that nurtures happiness. These are the four kinds
of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness that nurture happiness.

When a noble disciple has these four kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to measure how much merit they have by saying
that this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing goodness
that nurtures happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of merit."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "One who desires merit, grounded in the skillful,\
> develops the path to realize freedom from death.\
> Once they've reached the heart of the teaching,\
> \>delighting in ending,\
> they don't tremble at the approach\
> \>of the King of Death."

### N 55.44 Rich (1st) *Paṭhamamahaddhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is said to be rich,
affluent, and wealthy.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is said to be rich, affluent,
and wealthy."

### N 55.45 Rich (2nd) *Dutiyamahaddhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is said to be rich,
affluent, wealthy, and famous.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is said to be rich, affluent,
wealthy, and famous."

### N 55.46 Plain Version *Suddhakasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer,
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 55.47 With Nandiya *Nandiyasutta*

At Kapilavatthu. Seated to one side, the Buddha said to Nandiya the
Sakyan:

"Nandiya, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

### N 55.48 With Bhaddiya *Bhaddiyasutta*

At Kapilavatthu. Seated to one side, the Buddha said to Bhaddiya the
Sakyan:

"Bhaddiya, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer ..."

### N 55.49 With Mahānāma *Mahānāmasutta*

At Kapilavatthu. Seated to one side, the Buddha said to
Mahānāma the Sakyan:

"Mahānāma, a noble disciple who has four things is a
stream-enterer ..."

### N 55.50 Factors *Aṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four factors of stream-entry. What four?
Associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational
application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching. These are
the four factors of stream-entry."

## The Chapter on a Wise Person

### N 55.51 With Verses *Sagāthakasutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who has four things is a stream-enterer,
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

What four? It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And they have
the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion. A
noble disciple who has these four things is a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Whoever has faith in the Realized One,\
> unwavering and well grounded;\
> whose ethical conduct is good,\
> praised and loved by the noble ones;
>
> who has confidence in the Saṅgha,\
> and correct view:\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behaviour,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

### N 55.52 One Who Completed the Rains *Vassaṁvutthasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time a
certain mendicant who had completed the rainy season residence in
Sāvatthī arrived at Kapilavatthu on some business. The
Sakyans of Kapilavatthu heard about this.

They went to that mendicant, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, we hope that the Buddha is healthy and strong."

"He is, good fellows."

"And we hope that Sāriputta and Moggallāna are
healthy and strong."

"They are."

"And we hope that the mendicant Saṅgha is healthy and
strong."

"It is."

"But sir, during this rains residence did you hear and learn anything in
the presence of the Buddha?"

"Good fellows, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'There are fewer mendicants who realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. There are more
mendicants who, having ended the five lower fetters, are reborn
spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to return from
that world.'

In addition, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'There are fewer mendicants who, having ended the five lower fetters,
are reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world. There are more mendicants who, with the ending
of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are
once-returners, who come back to this world once only, then make an end
of suffering.'

In addition, I heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'There are fewer mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, are once-returners, who come
back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. There are
more mendicants who, with the ending of three fetters are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.'"

### N 55.53 With Dhammadinna *Dhammadinnasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. Then the lay follower Dhammadinna, together with five hundred
lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"May the Buddha please advise and instruct us. It will be for our
lasting welfare and happiness."

"So, Dhammadinna, you should train like this: 'From time to time we will
undertake and dwell upon the discourses spoken by the Realized One that
are deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness.' That's how
you should train yourselves."

"Sir, we live at home with our children, using sandalwood imported from
Kāsi, wearing garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and
accepting gold and currency. It's not easy for us to undertake and dwell
from time to time upon the discourses spoken by the Realized One that
are deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with emptiness. Since we are
established in the five training rules, please teach us further."

"So, Dhammadinna, you should train like this: 'We will have experiential
confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha
... And we will have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ...
leading to immersion.' That's how you should train yourselves."

"Sir, these four factors of stream-entry that were taught by the Buddha
are found in us, and we embody them. For we have experiential confidence
in the Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And we
have the ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to
immersion."

"You're fortunate, Dhammadinna, so very fortunate! You have all declared
the fruit of stream-entry."

### N 55.54 Sick *Gilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this. Then he went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him that he had heard
that the Buddha was leaving. He added, "Sir, I haven't heard and learned
it in the presence of the Buddha how a wise lay follower should advise
another wise lay follower who is sick, suffering, gravely ill."

"Mahānāma, a wise lay follower should put at ease another
wise lay follower who is sick, suffering, gravely ill with four
consolations. 'Be at ease, sir. You have experiential confidence in the
Buddha ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... And you have the
ethical conduct loved by the noble ones ... leading to immersion.'

When a wise lay follower has put at ease another wise lay follower who
is sick, suffering, gravely ill with these four consolations, they
should say: 'Are you concerned for your mother and father?' If they
reply, 'I am,' they should say: 'But sir, it's your nature to die.
Whether or not you are concerned for your mother and father, you will
die anyway. It would be good to give up concern for your mother and
father.'

If they reply, 'I have given up concern for my mother and father,' they
should say: 'But are you concerned for your partners and children?' If
they reply, 'I am,' they should say: 'But sir, it's your nature to die.
Whether or not you are concerned for your partners and children, you
will die anyway. It would be good to give up concern for your partners
and children.'

If they reply, 'I have given up concern for my partners and children,'
they should say: 'But are you concerned for the five kinds of human
sensual stimulation?' If they reply, 'I am,' they should say: 'Good
fellow, heavenly sensual pleasures are better than human sensual
pleasures. It would be good to turn your mind away from human sensual
pleasures and fix it on the gods of the four great kings.'

If they reply, 'I have done so,' they should say: 'Good fellow, the gods
of the thirty-three are better than the gods of the four great kings ...

Good fellow, the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love
to imagine ... the gods who control what is imagined by others ... the
gods of the realm of divinity are better than the gods who control what
is imagined by others. It would be good to turn your mind away from the
gods who control what is imagined by others and fix it on the gods of
the realm of divinity.' If they reply, 'I have done so,' they should
say: 'Good fellow, the realm of divinity is impermanent, not lasting,
and included within substantial reality. It would be good to turn your
mind away from the realm of divinity and apply it to the cessation of
substantial reality.'

If they reply, 'I have done so,' then there is no difference between a
lay follower whose mind is freed in this way and a mendicant whose mind
is freed from defilements; that is, between the freedom of one and the
other."

### N 55.55 The Fruit of Stream-Entry *Sotāpattiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the realization of the fruit of stream-entry. What four? Associating
with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational application
of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching. When these four
things are developed and cultivated they lead to the realization of the
fruit of stream-entry."

### N 55.56 The Fruit of Once-Return *Sakadāgāmiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the realization of the fruit of once-return. ..."

### N 55.57 The Fruit of Non-Return *Anāgāmiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the realization of the fruit of non-return. ..."

### N 55.58 The Fruit of Perfection *Arahattaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the realization of the fruit of perfection. ..."

### N 55.59 The Getting of Wisdom *Paññāpaṭilābhasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the getting of wisdom. ..."

### N 55.60 The Growth of Wisdom *Paññāvuddhisutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the growth of wisdom. ..."

### N 55.61 The Increase of Wisdom *Paññāvepullasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
the increase of wisdom. ..."

## The Chapter on Great Wisdom

### N 55.62 Great Wisdom *Mahāpaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
great wisdom. What four? Associating with true persons, listening to the
true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in line with
the teaching. When these four things are developed and cultivated they
lead to great wisdom."

### N 55.63 Widespread Wisdom *Puthupaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
widespread wisdom ..."

### N 55.64 Abundant Wisdom *Vipulapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
abundant wisdom ..."

### N 55.65 Deep Wisdom *Gambhīrapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
deep wisdom ..."

### N 55.66 Extraordinary Wisdom *Appamattapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
extraordinary wisdom ..."

### N 55.67 Vast Wisdom *Bhūripaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
vast wisdom ..."

### N 55.68 Much Wisdom *Paññābāhullasutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
much wisdom ..."

### N 55.69 Fast Wisdom *Sīghapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
fast wisdom ..."

### N 55.70 Light Wisdom *Lahupaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
light wisdom ..."

### N 55.71 Laughing Wisdom *Hāsapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
laughing wisdom ..."

### N 55.72 Swift Wisdom *Javanapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
swift wisdom ..."

### N 55.73 Sharp Wisdom *Tikkhapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
sharp wisdom ..."

### N 55.74 Penetrating Wisdom *Nibbedhikapaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when four things are developed and cultivated they lead to
penetrating wisdom. What four? Associating with true persons, listening
to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in
line with the teaching. When these four things are developed and
cultivated they lead to penetrating wisdom."



# Linked Discourses on the Truths

## The Chapter on Immersion

### N 56.1 Immersion *Samādhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, develop immersion. A mendicant who has immersion truly
understands. What do they truly understand? They truly understand: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. Develop immersion. A mendicant who has
immersion truly understands.

That's why you should practice meditation to understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'."

### N 56.2 Retreat *Paṭisallānasutta*

"Mendicants, meditate in retreat. A mendicant in retreat truly
understands. What do they truly understand? They truly understand: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. Meditate in retreat. A mendicant in retreat
truly understands.

That's why you should practice meditation to understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'."

### N 56.3 A Gentleman (1st) *Paṭhamakulaputtasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever gentlemen---past, future, or present---rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness, all of them do so in order to
truly comprehend the four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. Whatever gentlemen---past, future, or present---rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness, all of them do so in order to
truly comprehend the four noble truths.

That's why you should practice meditation to understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'."

### N 56.4 A Gentleman (2nd) *Dutiyakulaputtasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever gentlemen---past, future, or present---truly
comprehend after rightly going forth from the lay life to homelessness,
all of them truly comprehend the four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.5 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins truly wake up---in the past,
future, or present---all of them truly wake up to the four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.6 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins---past, future, or
present---reveal that they are awakened, all of them reveal that they
truly awakened to the four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.7 Thoughts *Vitakkasutta*

"Mendicants, don't think bad, unskillful thoughts, such as sensual,
malicious, and cruel thoughts. Why is that? Because those thoughts
aren't beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life.
They don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace,
insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

When you think, you should think: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. Why is that?
Because those thoughts are beneficial and relevant to the fundamentals
of the spiritual life. They lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.8 Thought *Cintasutta*

"Mendicants, don't think up a bad, unskillful idea. For example: the
cosmos is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and
the body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death,
a realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists
and no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. Why
is that? Because those thoughts aren't beneficial or relevant to the
fundamentals of the spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

When you think something up, you should think: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. Why is that? Because those thoughts are beneficial and
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.9 Arguments *Viggāhikakathāsutta*

"Mendicants, don't get into arguments, such as: 'You don't understand
this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and training.
What, you understand this teaching and training? You're practicing
wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You said last
what you should have said first. You said first what you should have
said last. What you've thought so much about has been disproved. Your
doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're trapped; get
yourself out of this---if you can!' Why is that? Because those
discussions aren't beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of the
spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

When you discuss, you should discuss: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is
the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.10 Low Talk *Tiracchānakathāsutta*

"Mendicants, don't engage in all kinds of low talk, such as talk about
kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and wars;
talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and
fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and
countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and talk at the
well; talk about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and
talk about being reborn in this or that place. Why is that? Because
those discussions aren't beneficial or relevant to the fundamentals of
the spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

When you discuss, you should discuss: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is
the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The Chapter on Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma

### N 56.11 Rolling Forth the Wheel of Dhamma *Dhammacakkappavattanasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the group of five mendicants:

"Mendicants, these two extremes should not be cultivated by one who has
gone forth. What two? Indulgence in sensual pleasures, which is low,
crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And indulgence in
self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and pointless. Avoiding
these two extremes, the Realized One understood the middle way of
practice, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace, direct
knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment.

And what is that middle way of practice? It is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion. This is that middle way of practice, which gives vision and
knowledge, and leads to peace, direct knowledge, awakening, and
extinguishment.

Now this is the noble truth of suffering. Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; illness is suffering; death is suffering; association with
the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not
getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping
aggregates are suffering.

Now this is the noble truth of the origin of suffering. It's the craving
that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking
pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence.

Now this is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering. It's the
fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left
over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to
it.

Now this is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering. It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

'This is the noble truth of suffering.' Such was the vision, knowledge,
wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not
learned before from another. 'This noble truth of suffering should be
completely understood.' Such was the vision that arose in me ... 'This
noble truth of suffering has been completely understood.' Such was the
vision that arose in me ...

'This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering.' Such was the
vision that arose in me ... 'This noble truth of the origin of suffering
should be given up.' Such was the vision that arose in me ... 'This
noble truth of the origin of suffering has been given up.' Such was the
vision that arose in me ...

'This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.' Such was the
vision that arose in me ... 'This noble truth of the cessation of
suffering should be realized.' Such was the vision that arose in me ...
'This noble truth of the cessation of suffering has been realized.' Such
was the vision that arose in me ...

'This is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' Such was the vision that arose in me ... 'This noble truth
of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering should be
developed.' Such was the vision that arose in me ... 'This noble truth
of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering has been
developed.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and
light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from
another.

As long as my true knowledge and vision about these four noble truths
was not fully purified in these three rounds and twelve aspects, I
didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when my true knowledge and vision about these four noble truths was
fully purified in these three rounds and twelve aspects, I announced my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the group of five mendicants
approved what the Buddha said.

And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate
vision of the Dhamma arose in Venerable Koṇḍañña:
"Everything that has a beginning has an end."

And when the Buddha rolled forth the Wheel of Dhamma, the earth gods
raised the cry: "Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the
Buddha has rolled forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel
cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or
Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world."

Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings ...
the gods of the thirty-three ... the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods
... the gods who love to imagine ... the gods who control what is
imagined by others ... the gods of the Divinity's host raised the cry:
"Near Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana, the Buddha has rolled
forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel cannot be rolled back
by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by
anyone in the world."

And so at that moment, that second, that hour, the cry soared up to the
realm of divinity. And this ten-thousandfold galaxy shook and rocked and
trembled. And an immeasurable, magnificent light appeared in the world,
surpassing the glory of the gods.

Then the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:
"Koṇḍañña has really understood! Koṇḍañña has
really understood!"

And that's how Venerable Koṇḍañña came to be known as
"Koṇḍañña Who Understood".

### N 56.12 The Realized Ones *Tathāgatasutta*

"'This is the noble truth of suffering.' Such was the vision, knowledge,
wisdom, realization, and light that arose in the Realized Ones regarding
teachings not learned before from another. 'This noble truth of
suffering should be completely understood.' ... 'This noble truth of
suffering has been completely understood.' ...

'This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering.' ... 'This noble
truth of the origin of suffering should be given up.' ... 'This noble
truth of the origin of suffering has been given up.' ...

'This is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.' ... 'This noble
truth of the cessation of suffering should be realized.' ... 'This noble
truth of the cessation of suffering has been realized.' ...

'This is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' ... 'This noble truth of the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering should be developed.' ... 'This noble truth of
the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering has been
developed.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and
light that arose in the Realized Ones regarding teachings not learned
before from another."

### N 56.13 Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? You should say: 'The five
grasping aggregates'. That is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. This is called the noble truth of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? It's the craving
that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking
pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is
called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? It's the
fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left
over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to
it. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the noble
truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. These
are the four noble truths.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.14 Interior Sense Fields *Ajjhattikāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? You should say: 'The six
interior sense fields'. What six? The sense fields of the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind. This is called the noble truth of
suffering. ..."

### N 56.15 Remembering (1st) *Paṭhamadhāraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, do you remember the four noble truths that I taught?" When
he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha:

"I do, sir."

"How so, mendicant?"

"Sir, I remember that suffering is the first noble truth you've taught;
the origin of suffering is the second; the cessation of suffering is the
third; and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the
fourth. That's how I remember the four noble truths as you've taught
them."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you remember the four noble
truths as I've taught them. Suffering is the first noble truth I've
taught, and that's how you should remember it. The origin of suffering
is the second; the cessation of suffering is the third; and the practice
that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth. That's how you
should remember the four noble truths as I've taught them.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.16 Remembering (2nd) *Dutiyadhāraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, do you remember the four noble truths that I taught?" When
he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha:

"I do, sir."

"How so, mendicant?"

"Sir, I remember that suffering is the first noble truth you've taught.
For if any ascetic or brahmin should say this: 'What the ascetic Gotama
teaches is not the first noble truth of suffering. I'll reject this
first noble truth of suffering and describe another first noble truth of
suffering.' That is not possible. The origin of suffering ... The
cessation of suffering ... The practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering is the fourth noble truth you've taught. For if any ascetic or
brahmin should say this: 'What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the
fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. I'll reject this fourth noble truth of the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering and describe another fourth noble
truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' That is
not possible. That's how I remember the four noble truths as you've
taught them."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you remember the four noble
truths as I've taught them. Suffering is the first noble truth I've
taught, and that's how you should remember it. For if any ascetic or
brahmin should say this: 'What the ascetic Gotama teaches is not the
first noble truth of suffering. I'll reject this first noble truth of
suffering and describe another first noble truth of suffering.' That is
not possible. The origin of suffering ... The cessation of suffering ...
The practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is the fourth
noble truth I've taught, and that's how you should remember it. For if
any ascetic or brahmin should say this: 'What the ascetic Gotama teaches
is not the fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering. I'll reject this fourth noble truth of the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering and describe another
fourth noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.' That is not possible. That's how you should remember the
four noble truths as I've taught them.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.17 Ignorance *Avijjāsutta*

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'ignorance'. What is ignorance?
And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Not knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.
This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is defined.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.18 Knowledge *Vijjāsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'knowledge'. What is knowledge?
And how is a knowledgeable person defined?"

"Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.
This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.19 Expressions *Saṅkāsanasutta*

"Mendicants, I've declared: 'This is the noble truth of suffering.' And
there are limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that:
'This is another way of saying that this is the noble truth of
suffering.' I've declared: 'This is the noble truth of the origin of
suffering.' ... I've declared: 'This is the noble truth of the cessation
of suffering.' ... I've declared: 'This is the noble truth of the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.' And there are
limitless explanations, phrases, and expressions about that: 'This is
another way of saying that this is the noble truth of the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering.'

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.20 Real *Tathasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are real, not unreal, not otherwise. What
four? 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ...
'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering' ... These four things are real, not
unreal, not otherwise.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The Chapter at the Village of Koṭi

### N 56.21 At the Village of Koṭi (1st) *Paṭhamakoṭigāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at the
village of Koṭi. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four noble
truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very
long time.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. These noble truths of suffering, origin, cessation, and the
path have been understood and comprehended. Craving for continued
existence has been cut off; the conduit to rebirth is ended; now
there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Because of not truly seeing\
> the four noble truths,\
> we have transmigrated for a long time\
> from one rebirth to the next.
>
> But now that these truths have been seen,\
> the conduit to rebirth is eradicated.\
> The root of suffering is cut off,\
> now there'll be no more future lives."

### N 56.22 At the Village of Koṭi (2nd) *Dutiyakoṭigāmasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. I don't deem
them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the
goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it
with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. I deem them as true ascetics
and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "There are those who don't understand suffering\
> and suffering's cause,\
> and where all suffering\
> ceases with nothing left over.
>
> And they do not know the path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.\
> They lack the heart's release,\
> as well as the release by wisdom.\
> Unable to make an end,\
> they continue to be reborn and grow old.
>
> But there are those who understand suffering\
> and suffering's cause,\
> and where all suffering\
> ceases with nothing left over.
>
> And they understand the path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.\
> They're endowed with the heart's release,\
> as well as the release by wisdom.\
> Able to make an end,\
> they don't continue to be reborn and grow old."

### N 56.23 The Fully Awakened Buddha *Sammāsambuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.
These are the four noble truths. It is because he has truly understood
these four noble truths that the Realized One is called 'the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha'.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.24 The Perfected Ones *Arahantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, whatever perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas truly wake
up---in the past, future, or present---all of them truly wake up to the
four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. Whatever perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas truly wake
up---in the past, future, or present---all of them truly wake up to the
four noble truths.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.25 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows
and sees, not for one who does not know or see. For one who knows and
sees what? The ending of defilements is for one who knows and sees
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. The ending of the
defilements is for one who knows and sees this.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.26 Friends *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of the
four noble truths.

What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in the true comprehension of
these four noble truths.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.27 Real *Tathasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.
These four noble truths are real, not unreal, not otherwise. That's why
they're called 'noble truths'.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.28 The World *Lokasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. In
this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans, the
Realized One is the Noble One. That's why they're called 'noble truths'.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.29 Should Be Completely Understood *Pariññeyyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble truths. What four? The noble
truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of
suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.
These are the four noble truths. Of these four noble truths, there is
one to be completely understood, one to be given up, one to be realized,
and one to be developed.

And which noble truth should be completely understood? The noble truth
of suffering should be completely understood. The noble truth of the
origin of suffering should be given up. The noble truth of the cessation
of suffering should be realized. The noble truth of the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering should be developed.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.30 With Gavampati *Gavampatisutta*

At one time several mendicants were staying in the land of the
Cetīs at Sahajāti. Now at that time, after the
meal, on return from almsround, several senior mendicants sat together
in the pavilion and this discussion came up among them:

"Reverends, does someone who sees suffering also see the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering?"

When they said this, Venerable Gavampati said to those senior
mendicants:

"Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Someone who sees suffering also sees the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. Someone who sees the origin of suffering also sees suffering,
the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering. Someone who sees the cessation of suffering also sees
suffering, the origin of suffering, and the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering. Someone who sees the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering also sees suffering, the origin of suffering, and
the cessation of suffering.'"

## The Chapter in a Rosewood Forest

### N 56.31 In a Rosewood Forest *Sīsapāvanasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī in a
rosewood forest. Then the Buddha picked up a few rosewood leaves in his
hand and addressed the mendicants: "What do you think, mendicants? Which
is more: the few leaves in my hand, or those in the forest above me?"

"Sir, the few leaves in your hand are a tiny amount. There are far more
leaves in the forest above."

"In the same way, there is much more that I have directly known but have
not explained to you. What I have explained is a tiny amount. And why
haven't I explained it? Because it's not beneficial or relevant to the
fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
That's why I haven't explained it.

And what have I explained? I have explained: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.

And why have I explained this? Because it's beneficial and relevant to
the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
That's why I've explained it.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.32 Acacia Leaves *Khadirapattasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose someone were to say: 'Without truly comprehending
the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path,
I will completely make an end of suffering.' That is not possible.

It's as if someone were to say: 'I'll make a basket out of acacia leaves
or pine needles or myrobalan leaves, and use it to carry water or a palm
frond.' That is not possible. In the same way, suppose someone were to
say: 'Without truly comprehending the noble truths of suffering, its
origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely make an end of
suffering.' That is not possible.

But suppose someone were to say: 'After truly comprehending the noble
truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will
completely make an end of suffering.' That is possible.

It's as if someone were to say: 'I'll make a basket out of lotus leaves
or flame-of-the-forest leaves or camel's foot creeper leaves, and use it
to carry water or a palm frond.' That is possible. In the same way,
suppose someone were to say: 'After truly comprehending the noble truths
of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will completely
make an end of suffering.' That is possible.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.33 A Stick *Daṇḍasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a stick was tossed up in the air. Sometimes it'd
fall on its bottom and sometimes the top. It's the same for sentient
beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and fettered by
craving. Sometimes they go from this world to the other world, and
sometimes they come from the other world to this world. Why is that?
It's because they haven't seen the four noble truths. What four? The
noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.34 Clothes *Celasutta*

"Mendicants, if your clothes or head were on fire, what would you do
about it?"

"Sir, if our clothes or head were on fire, we'd apply intense
enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness in order to extinguish it."

"Mendicants, so long as you have not comprehended the four noble truths,
regard your burning head or clothes with equanimity, ignore them, and
apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness to truly comprehending the four
noble truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its
cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.35 A Hundred Spears *Sattisatasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a man with a lifespan of a hundred years.
And someone might say to him: 'Come now, my good man, they'll strike you
with a hundred spears in the morning, at midday, and in the late
afternoon. And you'll live for a hundred years being struck with three
hundred spears every day. But when a hundred years have passed, you will
comprehend the four noble truths for the first time.'

For an earnest gentleman this is sufficient reason to submit.

Why is that? Transmigration has no known beginning. No first point is
found of blows by spears, swords, arrows, and axes. Now this may be so.
But the comprehension of the four noble truths doesn't come with pain or
sadness, I say. Rather, the comprehension of the four noble truths comes
only with pleasure and happiness, I say. What four? The noble truths of
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.36 Living Creatures *Pāṇasutta*

"Suppose a person was to strip all the grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves in the Black Plum Tree Land, gather them together into one pile,
and make them into stakes. Then they'd impale the large creatures in the
ocean on large stakes; the medium-sized creatures on medium-sized
stakes; and the small creatures on small stakes. They wouldn't run out
of sizable creatures in the ocean before using up all the grass, sticks,
branches, and leaves in the Black Plum Tree Land. There are far more
small creatures in the ocean than this, so it wouldn't be feasible to
impale them on stakes. Why is that? Because of the small size of those
life-forms. That's how big the plane of loss is.

A person accomplished in view, exempt from that vast plane of loss,
truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.37 The Simile of the Sun (1st) *Paṭhamasūriyasutta*

"Mendicants, the dawn is the forerunner and precursor of the sunrise.

In the same way, right view is the forerunner and precursor of truly
comprehending the four noble truths. A mendicant with right view can
expect to truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin
of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.38 The Simile of the Sun (2nd) *Dutiyasūriyasutta*

"Mendicants, as long as the moon and the sun don't arise in the world,
no great light or great radiance appears. Darkness prevails then, utter
darkness. Day and night aren't found, nor months and fortnights, nor
seasons and years.

But when the moon and the sun arise in the world, a great light, a great
radiance appears. Darkness no longer prevails. Day and night are found,
and months and fortnights, and seasons and years.

In the same way, as long as the Realized One doesn't arise in the world,
no great light or great radiance appears. Darkness prevails then, utter
darkness. There's no explanation of the four noble truths, no teaching,
advocating, establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of them.

But when the Realized One arises in the world, a great light, a great
radiance appears. Darkness no longer prevails. Then there's the
explanation of the four noble truths, the teaching, advocating,
establishing, clarifying, analyzing, and revealing of them. What four?
The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.39 A Boundary Pillar *Indakhīlasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. They gaze up
at the face of another ascetic or brahmin, thinking: 'Surely this worthy
one knows and sees.'

Suppose there was a light tuft of cotton-wool or kapok which was taken
up by the wind and landed on level ground. The east wind wafts it west;
the west wind wafts it east; the north wind wafts it south; and the
south wind wafts it north. Why is that? It's because the tuft of
cotton-wool is so light.

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly
understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.
They gaze up at the face of another ascetic or brahmin, thinking:
'Surely this worthy one knows and sees.' Why is that? It's because they
haven't seen the four noble truths.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. They don't gaze up at the face
of another ascetic or brahmin, thinking: 'Surely this worthy one knows
and sees.'

Suppose there was an iron pillar or a boundary pillar with deep
foundations, firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. Even if
violent storms were to blow up out of the east, the west, the north, and
the south, they couldn't make it shake or rock or tremble. Why is that?
It's because that boundary pillar is firmly embedded, with deep
foundations.

In the same way, there are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. They don't
gaze up at the face of another ascetic or brahmin, thinking: 'Surely
this worthy one knows and sees.' Why is that? It's because they have
clearly seen the four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.40 Looking For a Debate *Vādatthikasutta*

"Mendicants, take any mendicant who truly understands: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. An ascetic or brahmin might come from the east,
west, north, or south wanting to debate, seeking a debate, thinking:
'I'll refute their doctrine!' It's simply impossible for them to
legitimately make that mendicant shake or rock or tremble.

Suppose there was a stone pillar, sixteen feet long. Eight feet were
buried underground, and eight above ground. Even if violent storms were
to blow up out of the east, the west, the north, and the south, they
couldn't make it shake or rock or tremble. Why is that? It's because
that boundary pillar is firmly embedded, with deep foundations.

In the same way, take any mendicant who truly understands: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. An ascetic or brahmin might come from the east,
west, north, or south wanting to debate, seeking a debate, thinking:
'I'll refute their doctrine!' It's simply impossible for them to
legitimately make that mendicant shake or rock or tremble. Why is that?
It's because they have clearly seen the four noble truths. What four?
The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The Chapter on a Cliff

### N 56.41 Speculation About the World *Lokacintāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. There the Buddha addressed
the mendicants:

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a certain person left
Rājagaha, thinking 'I'll speculate about the world.' They
went to the Sumāgadhā lotus pond and sat down on the bank
speculating about the world. Then that person saw an army of four
divisions enter a lotus stalk. When he saw this he thought, 'I've gone
mad, really, I've lost my mind! I'm seeing things that don't exist in
the world.'

Then that person entered the city and informed a large crowd, 'I've gone
mad, really, I've lost my mind! I'm seeing things that don't exist in
the world.'

'But how is it that you're mad? How have you lost your mind? And what
have you seen that doesn't exist in the world?'

'Sirs, I left Rājagaha, thinking "I'll speculate about the
world." I went to the Sumāgadhā lotus pond and sat down on
the bank speculating about the world. Then I saw an army of four
divisions enter a lotus stalk. That's why I'm mad, that's why I've lost
my mind. And that's what I've seen that doesn't exist in the world.'

'Well, worthy man, you're definitely mad, you've definitely lost your
mind. And you're seeing things that don't exist in the world.'

But what that person saw was in fact real, not unreal. Once upon a time,
a battle was fought between the gods and the titans. In that battle the
gods won and the titans lost. The defeated and terrified titans entered
the citadel of the titans through the lotus stalk only to confuse the
gods.

So mendicants, don't speculate about the world. For example: the cosmos
is eternal, or not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the
body are the same thing, or they are different things; after death, a
realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and
no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists. Why is
that? Because those thoughts aren't beneficial or relevant to the
fundamentals of the spiritual life. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

When you think something up, you should think: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. Why is that? Because those thoughts are beneficial and
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. They lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.42 A Cliff *Papātasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Come, mendicants, let's go to
Inspiration Peak for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," they replied. Then the Buddha together with several
mendicants went to Inspiration Peak.

A certain mendicant saw the big cliff there and said to the Buddha,
"Sir, that big cliff is really huge and scary. Is there any other cliff
bigger and scarier than this one?"

"There is, mendicant."

"But sir, what is it?"

"Mendicant, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. They take
pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. Since they take pleasure in
such choices, they continue to make them. Having made choices that lead
to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress, they fall down the cliff of rebirth, old age, and death,
of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed
from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress. They're not freed from suffering, I say.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. They don't take pleasure in
choices that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. Since they don't take pleasure
in such choices, they stop making them. Having stopped making choices
that lead to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress, they don't fall down the cliff of rebirth, old
age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from suffering,
I say.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.43 The Mighty Fever *Mahāpariḷāhasutta*

"Mendicants, there is a hell called 'The Mighty Fever'. There, whatever
sight you see with your eye is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not
desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant. Whatever sound you hear ...
Whatever odor you smell ... Whatever flavor you taste ... Whatever touch
you feel ... Whatever idea you know with your mind is unlikable, not
likable; undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant."

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, that
fever really is mighty, so very mighty. Is there any other fever more
mighty and terrifying than this one?"

"There is, mendicant."

"But sir, what is it?"

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. They take
pleasure in choices that lead to rebirth ... They continue to make such
choices ... Having made such choices, they burn with the fever of
rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. They're not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. They don't take pleasure in
choices that lead to rebirth ... They stop making such choices ...
Having stopped making such choices, they don't burn with the fever of
rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from suffering,
I say.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.44 A Bungalow *Kūṭāgārasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose someone were to say: 'Without truly comprehending
the noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path,
I will completely make an end of suffering.' That is not possible.

It's as if someone were to say: 'Before the lower story of a bungalow is
built, I will hoist up the upper story.' That is not possible. In the
same way, suppose someone were to say: 'Without truly comprehending the
noble truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I
will completely make an end of suffering.' That is not possible.

But suppose someone were to say: 'After truly comprehending the noble
truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will
completely make an end of suffering.' That is possible.

It's as if someone were to say: 'After the lower story of a bungalow is
built, I will hoist up the upper story.' That is possible. In the same
way, suppose someone were to say: 'After truly comprehending the noble
truths of suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path, I will
completely make an end of suffering.' That is possible.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.45 Splitting Hairs *Vālasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Vesālī for alms. He saw several Licchavi
youths practicing archery near the town hall. They were shooting arrows
from a distance through a small keyhole, shot after shot without
missing.

When he saw this he thought, "These Licchavi youths really are trained,
so well trained, in that they shoot arrows from a distance through a
small keyhole, shot after shot without missing."

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Vesālī. After the meal, on
his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"What do you think, Ānanda? Which is harder and more challenging: to
shoot arrows from a distance through a small keyhole, shot after shot
without missing? Or to take a horsehair split into seven strands and
penetrate one tip with another tip?"

"It's more difficult and challenging, sir, to take a horsehair split
into seven strands and penetrate one tip with another tip."

"Still, Ānanda, those who truly penetrate suffering, its origin, its
cessation, and the path penetrate something tougher than that.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.46 Darkness *Andhakārasutta*

"Mendicants, the boundless void of interstellar space is so utterly dark
that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful,
makes no impression."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "Sir, that
darkness really is mighty, so very mighty. Is there any other darkness
more mighty and terrifying than this one?"

"There is, mendicant."

"But sir, what is it?"

"There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand about
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. They take pleasure
in choices that lead to rebirth ... They continue to make such choices
... Having made such choices, they fall into the darkness of rebirth,
old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
They're not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path. They don't take pleasure in
choices that lead to rebirth ... They stop making such choices ...
Having stopped making such choices, they don't fall into the darkness of
rebirth, old age, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress. They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from suffering,
I say.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.47 A Yoke With a Hole (1st) *Paṭhamachiggaḷayugasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a person were to throw a yoke with a single hole
into the ocean. And there was a one-eyed turtle who popped up once every
hundred years.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that one-eyed turtle, popping up
once every hundred years, still poke its neck through the hole in that
yoke?"

"Only after a very long time, sir, if ever."

"That one-eyed turtle would poke its neck through the hole in that yoke
sooner than a fool who has fallen to the underworld would be reborn as a
human being, I say.

Why is that? Because in that place there's no principled or moral
conduct, and no doing what is good and skillful. There they just prey on
each other, preying on the weak. Why is that? It's because they haven't
seen the four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering,
its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.48 A Yoke With a Hole (2nd) *Dutiyachiggaḷayugasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose the earth was entirely covered with water. And a
person threw a yoke with a single hole into it. The east wind wafts it
west; the west wind wafts it east; the north wind wafts it south; and
the south wind wafts it north. And there was a one-eyed turtle who
popped up once every hundred years.

What do you think, mendicants? Would that one-eyed turtle, popping up
once every hundred years, still poke its neck through the hole in that
yoke?"

"It's unlikely, sir."

"That's how unlikely it is to get reborn as a human being. And that's
how unlikely it is for a Realized One to arise in the world, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha. And that's how unlikely it is for the
teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One to shine in the
world. And now, mendicants, you have been reborn as a human being. A
Realized One has arisen in the world, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha. And the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One
shines in the world.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.49 Sineru, King of Mountains (1st) *Paṭhamasinerupabbatarājasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place down on Sineru, the king of
mountains, seven pebbles the size of mung beans.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size
of mung beans? Or Sineru, the king of mountains?"

"Sir, Sineru, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven
pebbles the size of mung beans are tiny. Compared to Sineru, they don't
count, there's no comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's
not worth a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. Such a
person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and
the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.50 Sineru, King of Mountains (2nd) *Dutiyasinerupabbatarājasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose Sineru, the king of mountains, was worn away and
eroded except for seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the portion of Sineru, the
king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded? Or the seven
pebbles the size of mustard seeds that are left?"

"Sir, the portion of Sineru, the king of mountains, that has been worn
away and eroded is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of mustard
seeds are tiny. Compared to Sineru, they don't count, there's no
comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's
not worth a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. Such a
person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and
the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The Chapter on Comprehension

### N 56.51 A Fingernail *Nakhasikhāsutta*

Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail,
addressed the mendicants: "What do you think, mendicants? Which is more:
the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The little bit of dirt under
your fingernail is tiny. Compared to the great earth, it doesn't count,
there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's
not worth a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. Such a
person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and
the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.52 A Lotus Pond *Pokkharaṇīsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a lotus pond that was fifty leagues long,
fifty leagues wide, and fifty leagues deep, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. Then a person would pick up some water on the tip
of a blade of grass.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water on the tip of
the blade of grass, or the water in the lotus pond?"

"Sir, the water in the lotus pond is certainly more. The water on the
tip of a blade of grass is tiny. Compared to the water in the lotus
pond, it doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's not worth a
fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.53 Where the Waters Flow Together (1st) *Paṭhamasambhejjasutta*

"Mendicants, there are places where the great rivers---the Ganges,
Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---come together and converge. Suppose a person was to
draw two or three drops of water from such a place.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the two or three drops
drawn out or the water in the confluence?"

"Sir, the water in the confluence is certainly more. The two or three
drops drawn out are tiny. Compared to the water in the confluence, it
doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.54 Where the Waters Flow Together (2nd) *Dutiyasambhejjasutta*

"Mendicants, there are places where the great rivers---the Ganges,
Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---come together and converge. Suppose that water dried
up and evaporated except for two or three drops.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water in the
confluence that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops
left?"

"Sir, the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated is
certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the
water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, it doesn't
count, there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.55 The Earth (1st) *Paṭhamamahāpathavīsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place seven clay balls the size of
jujube seeds on the great earth.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven clay balls the
size of jujube seeds, or the great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size
of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth, they don't count,
there's no comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.56 The Earth (2nd) *Dutiyamahāpathavīsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose the great earth was worn away and eroded except for
seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the great earth that has
been worn away and eroded, or the seven clay balls the size of jujube
seeds that are left?"

"Sir, the great earth that has been worn away and eroded is certainly
more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared
to the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, they don't count,
there's no comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.57 The Ocean (1st) *Paṭhamamahāsamuddasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a man was to draw up two or three drops of water
from the ocean.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the two or three drops
drawn out or the water in the ocean?"

"Sir, the water in the ocean is certainly more. The two or three drops
drawn out are tiny. Compared to the water in the ocean, it doesn't
count, there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.58 The Ocean (2nd) *Dutiyamahāsamuddasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose the water in the ocean dried up and evaporated
except for two or three drops.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water in the ocean
that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops left?"

"Sir, the water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated is
certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the
water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated, it doesn't count,
there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.59 A Mountain (1st) *Paṭhamapabbatūpamasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place seven pebbles the size of
mustard seeds on the Himalayas, the king of mountains.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size
of mustard seeds, or the Himalayas, the king of mountains?"

"Sir, the Himalayas, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven
pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas,
they don't count, there's no comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple ...

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.60 A Mountain (2nd) *Dutiyapabbatūpamasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose the Himalayas, the king of mountains, was worn away
and eroded except for seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the portion of the
Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded, or
the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds that are left?"

"Sir, the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been
worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of
mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, they don't count,
there's no comparison, they're not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it doesn't count, there's no comparison, it's
not worth a fraction, since there are at most seven more lives. Such a
person truly understands about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and
the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The First Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Raw Grain

### N 56.61 Not Human *Aññatrasutta*

Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail,
addressed the mendicants: "What do you think, mendicants? Which is more:
the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The little bit of dirt under
your fingernail is tiny. Compared to the great earth, it doesn't count,
there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, the sentient beings reborn as humans are few, while
those not reborn as humans are many. Why is that? It's because they
haven't seen the four noble truths. What four? The noble truths of
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

### N 56.62 In the Borderlands *Paccantasutta*

Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail,
addressed the mendicants: "What do you think, mendicants? Which is more:
the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The little bit of dirt under
your fingernail is tiny. Compared to the great earth, it doesn't count,
there's no comparison, it's not worth a fraction."

"In the same way, the sentient beings reborn in central countries are
few, while those reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners,
are many. ..."

### N 56.63 Wisdom *Paññāsutta*

"... the sentient beings who have the noble eye of wisdom are few, while
those who are ignorant and confused are many. ..."

### N 56.64 Beer and Wine *Surāmerayasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants, are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.65 Born in Water *Odakasutta*

"... the sentient beings born on land are few, while those born in water
are many. ..."

### N 56.66 Respect Mother *Matteyyasutta*

"... the sentient beings who respect their mothers are few, while those
who don't are many. ..."

### N 56.67 Respect Father *Petteyyasutta*

"... the sentient beings who respect their fathers are few, while those
who don't are many. ..."

### N 56.68 Respect Ascetics *Sāmaññasutta*

"... the sentient beings who respect ascetics are few, while those who
don't are many. ..."

### N 56.69 Respect Brahmins *Brahmaññasutta*

"... the sentient beings who respect brahmins are few, while those who
don't are many. ..."

### N 56.70 Honor the Elders *Pacāyikasutta*

"... the sentient beings who honor the elders in the family are few,
while those who don't are many. ..."

## The Second Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Raw Grain

### N 56.71 Killing Living Creatures *Pāṇātipātasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from killing living creatures are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.72 Stealing *Adinnādānasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from stealing are few, while those
who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.73 Sexual Misconduct *Kāmesumicchācārasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from sexual misconduct are few,
while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.74 Lying *Musāvādasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from lying are few, while those who
don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.75 Divisive Speech *Pesuññasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from divisive speech are few, while
those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.76 Harsh Speech *Pharusavācāsutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from harsh speech are few, while
those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.77 Nonsense *Samphappalāpasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from talking nonsense are few,
while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.78 Plants *Bījagāmasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from injuring plants and seeds are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.79 Food at the Wrong Time *Vikālabhojanasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from food at the wrong time are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.80 Fragrance and Makeup *Gandhavilepanasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from beautifying and adorning
themselves with garlands, fragrance, and makeup are few, while those who
don't refrain are many ..."

## The Third Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Raw Grain

### N 56.81 Dancing and Singing *Naccagītasutta*

.... "... the sentient beings who refrain from seeing shows of dancing,
singing, and music are few, while those who don't refrain are many ..."

### N 56.82 High Beds *Uccāsayanasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from high and luxurious beds are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.83 Gold and Currency *Jātarūparajatasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving gold and currency
are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.84 Raw Grain *Āmakadhaññasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving raw grain are few,
while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.85 Raw Meat *Āmakamaṁsasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving raw meat are few,
while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.86 Women and Girls *Kumārikasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving women and girls are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.87 Bondservants *Dāsidāsasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving male and female
bondservants are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.88 Goats and Sheep *Ajeḷakasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving goats and sheep are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.89 Chickens and Pigs *Kukkuṭasūkarasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving chickens and pigs
are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.90 Elephants and Cows *Hatthigavassasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving elephants, cows,
horses, and mares are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

## The Fourth Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Raw Grain

### N 56.91 Fields and Land *Khettavatthusutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from receiving fields and land are
few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.92 Buying and Selling *Kayavikkayasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from buying and selling are few,
while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.93 Errands *Dūteyyasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from running errands and messages
are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.94 False Weights *Tulākūṭasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from falsifying weights, metals, or
measures are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.95 Bribery *Ukkoṭanasutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from bribery, fraud, cheating, and
duplicity are few, while those who don't refrain are many. ..."

### N 56.96--101 Mutilation, Etc. *Chedanādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who refrain from mutilation, murder, abduction,
banditry, plunder, and violence are few, while those who don't refrain
are many. Why is that? It's because they haven't seen the four noble
truths. What four? The noble truths of suffering, its origin, its
cessation, and the path.

That's why you should practice meditation ..."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Five Destinations

### N 56.102 Passing Away as Humans and Reborn in Hell *Manussacutinirayasutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell are many ..."

### N 56.103 Passing Away as Humans and Reborn as Animals *Manussacutitiracchānasutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in the animal realm
are many ..."

### N 56.104 Passing Away as Humans and Reborn as Ghosts *Manussacutipettivisayasutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in the ghost realm are
many ..."

### N 56.105--107 Passing Away as Humans and Reborn as Gods *Manussacutidevanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.108--110 Passing Away as Gods and Reborn as Gods *Devacutinirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.111--113 Dying as Gods and Reborn as Humans *Devamanussanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.114--116 Dying in Hell and Reborn as Humans *Nirayamanussanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.117--119 Dying in Hell and Reborn as Gods *Nirayadevanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.120--122 Dying as Animals and Reborn as Humans *Tiracchānamanussanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.123--125 Dying as Animals and Reborn as Gods *Tiracchānadevanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.126--128 Dying as Ghosts and Reborn as Humans *Pettimanussanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

### N 56.129--130 Dying as Ghosts and Reborn as Gods *Pettidevanirayādisutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell are many."

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in the animal realm
are many."

### N 56.131 Dying as Ghosts and Reborn as Ghosts *Pettidevapettivisayasutta*

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in the ghost realm are
many. Why is that? It's because they haven't seen the four noble truths.
What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering.

That's why you should practice meditation to understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.
