# Colophon

### The Translator

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

### Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the
Pali Tipiṭaka. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi. Older
translations by Maurice Walshe and T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids were also
consulted.

### The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

### About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

### About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

### About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

[^1]: Tradition holds that these were the words spoken by Ānanda when
    reciting the Suttapiṭaka at the First Council following
    the Buddha's death. In fact it is a tag signifying that the text has
    been passed down through oral tradition and the speaker was not
    present at the events ([DN
    5:21.10](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#21.10), [MN
    127:17.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn127/en/sujato#17.4)). \| This
    sutta with its commentary was translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi in his
   *The All-Embracing Net of Views*.

[^2]: By convention, suttas do not specify the date, so we have scant
    internal chronology. \| Walk about fifteen kilometers north from
    Rājagaha (modern Rajgir) to reach Nāḷandā.
    \| "Mendicant" is a literal translation of *bhikkhu*, one who goes
    for alms.

[^3]: A "wanderer" (*paribbājaka*) was a homeless religious
    renunciate---male or female, Brahmanical or other---who wandered
    seeking alms. \| "Resident pupil" (or elsewhere just "pupil") is
   *antevāsi*, a live-in apprentice of a master. \|
    "Student" (*māṇava*) is a young man who was learning
    the Vedas from a master.

[^4]: Today these are called the Triple Gem that makes up the Buddhist
    religion; however they are not known by that term in the early
    texts.

[^5]: While the disagreement of student and teacher signifies their
    confusion, it also represents the diversity of views within the
    brahmanical caste and the openness with which a student could
    disagree with their teacher.

[^6]: Ambalaṭṭhikā means "place of mango saplings". It was
    a rest-house set up by the king of Rājagaha about a
    day's journey from the capital. It must have been sizable.

[^7]: *Saṅkhiyadhamma* is a unique term. The commentary
    glosses it as *kathādhamma*, following which it has
    been translated as "conversation" or "trend of conversation". But
   *saṅkhā* means "appraisal, assessment, evaluation,
    measuring, calculating", and here the subject of discussion is the
    different ways the two parties assess or judge the Buddha, Dhamma,
    and Saṅgha. Compare the "appraisal" of the Buddha at
    [DN 19:19.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#19.2).

[^8]: *Adhimutti* is something that has been decided, a conviction or
    belief.

[^9]: This would have been an open air pavilion in the rest-house. By
    convention, when a teacher or other respected person is to sit, a
    sitting mat is spread out or made ready for them.

[^10]: The very first words of the Buddha in the
    Suttapiṭaka: he asks to hear what others are saying.

[^11]: Here and in similar passages the Pali repeats all and I
    abbreviate.

[^12]: The phrasing here is somewhat unusual and specific. They "should
    not do" what creates bitterness (i.e. judging others). Compare [MN
    22](https://suttacentral.net/mn22/en/sujato), where the same phrases
    are used. In the Buddha's case, it has the neutral *hoti*, while for
    the mendicants it uses *karaṇīya*, as here.

[^13]: Complaining about others does not hurt them, only the one who
    gets upset.

[^14]: Equanimity is a prerequisite for evaluating facts.

[^15]: Ethics (or morality or virtue, *sīla*) is important,
    but it pales in comparison with the higher dimensions of the
    Buddha's path. For an example of this kind of praise see [MN
    77:8.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#8.1). \| The Buddha
    often referred to himself as "the Realized One"
    (*tathāgata*).

[^16]: Here the Buddha lays out in detail the ethical conduct for
    mendicant followers.

[^17]: The first and most important precept. It is not just the negative
    injunction to avoid killing, but also the positive injunction to
    have compassion for all creatures. \| The Buddha is called "the
    ascetic Gotama" by non-Buddhists.

[^18]: An "ordinary person" (*puthujjana*) is anyone who has not, at
    minimum, entered the path to stream-entry.

[^19]: "Chastity" is *brahmacariya*, literally "divine conduct". Here it
    is used in the narrow sense of refraining from sex, but more
    commonly it has a broader sense of "spiritual life".

[^20]: This is the first of the four kinds of right speech. Just as the
    precept of not killing implies the positive injunction to live with
    compassion, the precepts on speech enjoin a positive and
    constructive use of speech.

[^21]: "Harmony" (or "unanimity", *samagga*) does not excuse untrue,
    bigoted, or otherwise harmful speech. True harmony is only achieved
    in the presence of the Dhamma.

[^22]: *Attha* is a polyvalent term, here taking the senses "meaningful"
    and "beneficial". Elsewhere it means "goal", "need", "purpose",
    "lawsuit", or "ending", and the senses are not always easy to
    untangle.

[^23]: Buddhists generally do not regard plants as sentient, but value
    them as part of the ecosystem that supports all life.

[^24]: From [MN 66:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn66/en/sujato#6.4) and
    [MN 70:4.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn70/en/sujato#4.8) we can see
    that "at night" means after dark, while "at the wrong time" means in
    the afternoon. More explicitly, these are the "wrong time at night"
    and the "wrong time in the day", in which case they are both the
    "wrong time".

[^25]: Such sensual entertainments distract and excite the mind. This
    and the next three precepts encourage peace of mind for meditation.

[^26]: This was ignored by the Buddha's cousin, Nanda ([SN
    21.8:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.8/en/sujato#1.2)).

[^27]: To avoid sleeping too much.

[^28]: Literally "gold and silver" (*jātarūparajata*), but
   *rajata* is explained in [Bu NP
    18:2.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-np18/en/sujato#2.8) as
    currency of any kind.

[^29]: Mendicants receive only the day's meal and do not store or cook
    food.

[^30]: According to ancient Indian law (Arthaśāstra 3.13),
    a person in a time of trouble may bind themselves in service for a
    fee. Such bondservants were protected against cruelty, sexual abuse,
    and unfair work. After earning back the fee of their indenture they
    were freed, retaining their original inheritance and status.

[^31]: These are animals raised for food.

[^32]: Land for a monastery may be accepted by the Saṅgha
    as a community, but not by individual mendicants.

[^33]: These items are discussed in detail below. \| Acting as a
    go-between for lay business was tempting due to the mendicants'
    wandering lifestyle. However, it exposes them to risk if the message
    is not delivered or if it is bad news.

[^34]: For example, trading in monastery property.

[^35]: This section expands some of the former section in further
    detail. \| The "middle" and "large" sections on ethics are not found
    in briefer presentations such as [MN
    27:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn27/en/sujato#14.1).

[^36]: That these are not five "kinds of seeds" but five kinds of
    "plants grown from seeds" is clear from the Vinaya and its
    commentary ([Bu Pc
    11](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc11/en/sujato):
   *Bhūtagāmo nāma pañca
    bījajātāni*).

[^37]: For storing up food as a sign of decline, see [DN
    27:17.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#17.5).

[^38]: *Sobhanaka* ("beauty pageant") is explained by the commentary as
    the movement (or "sprinkling") of dancers, or their beautification
    and painting. The PTS reading *sobha-nagarakaṁ*,
    supported by an unrelated reference to a *gandhabba* city of that
    name, is spurious. \| *Caṇḍālaṁ vaṁsaṁ
    dhovanaṁ* should be a compound, as shown by the prose
    to [Ja 498](https://suttacentral.net/ja498/en/sujato), where it is a
    performance by corpse-workers (*caṇḍāla*) in
    Ujjenī. *Vaṁsa* is the bamboo used by
   *caṇḍāla* acrobats ([SN
    47.19](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.19/en/sujato)). *Dhovana* is
    referred by the commentary to [AN
    10.107](https://suttacentral.net/an10.107/en/sujato), where it is a
    southern ceremony accompanied by drink and dance. The commentaries
    to AN and DN say it was the ritual washing of the bones of the
    buried dead after the decomposition of the flesh. Such "second
    funeral" rites have been observed world-wide. From the
    Jātaka it appears that the tradition had declined to a
    mere display for passers-by, perhaps featuring naked tribal girls.
    \| *Uyodhika* is sometimes said to be "sham fights", but at [AN
    10.30](https://suttacentral.net/an10.30/en/sujato) it is not a sham.
    And the definition at [Bu Pc
    50](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc50/en/sujato) says
    "where strife is seen".

[^39]: See too [DN
    31:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn31/en/sujato#11.1).

[^40]: "Checkers" (*aṭṭhapada*) was presumably the ancestor
    of the Gupta period *caturaṅga* and hence modern chess.
    \| *Yathāvajja* is explained in the commentary as
    "mimicking deformities", but I cannot find support elsewhere in Pali
    or Sanskrit for *vajja* in this sense. More likely it refers to
    musical instruments (Sanskrit *vādya*).

[^41]: *Tiracchānakathā* literally means "animal talk". The
    Pali word for animal, *tiracchāna* has the sense of
    "moving horizontally", and "low talk" is that which does not
    elevate.

[^42]: *Bhavābhava* does not mean "existence and
    non-existence" but is a distributive compound, "this or that state
    of existence". Indian religious texts are full of discussions about
    different heavens and hells.

[^43]: The folly of disputatiousness is a consistent theme in the
    suttas, but is a special focus of the Aṭṭhakavagga of
    the Suttanipāta.

[^44]: "Rulers" (*raññaṁ*, genitive plural) include
    hereditary kings as well as the elected joint leaders of republican
    states such as the Sakyans or Vajjis.

[^45]: Some renunciants like to butter up potential donors, or make
    ostentatious displays to prompt further donations. \| "Using
    material possessions to chase after other material possessions"
    includes trading monastery property for profit.

[^46]: This section focuses on practices that are wrong livelihood for a
    mendicant, though not for lay people. The Vinaya explains "low lore"
    as whatever is non-Buddhist or useless ([Bi Pc
    49](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pc49/en/sujato)), while
    the commentary says it leads not to emancipation but to heaven.

[^47]: Reading *khattavijjā* ("political science") per
    variant as *khettavijjā* ("geomancy"). \| *Sara* in
   *saraparitta* means "sound" not "arrow"; compare with
   *sarabhañña* "chanting". \| *Migacakka* is explained in
    the commentary, supported by the astrological text
    Bṛhatsaṁhitā, as interpretation of the cries and
    behaviors of wild animals. Here the suffix *-cakka* refers to the
    field of study. See also [Mil
    5.3.7:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/mil5.3.7/en/sujato#6.1)
   *sācakkaṁ migacakkaṁ
    antaracakkaṁ* ("divining omens from dogs, wild animals,
    and the directions around"), terms which are also found at
    Bṛhatsaṁhitā 2.

[^48]: The commentary oddly has "earrings or house-gables" for
   *kaṇṇika* ("eared one"), but it must be "rabbit", for
    which see *sasakaṇṇikā* at [Ja
    535:76](https://suttacentral.net/ja535/en/sujato#76).

[^49]: Despite this, astrology is commonly practiced today among
    Buddhist mendicants. \| *(Up)pathagamana* can hardly mean that the
    sun, moon, and stars will "go astray". Rather, *patha* here has the
    sense of "range", so it means "come within range", which describes
    an astrological conjunction. \| For "fiery sky"
    (*disāḍāha*) as an ill omen, see *diśāṁ
    dāhe* at Manusmṛti 4.115.

[^50]: "Cosmology" (*lokāyata*) in early Buddhist texts is
    not, as it later became known, the heterodox school of materialism.
    Rather, it was a branch of worldly knowledge within regular Vedic
    studies concerned with the nature and extent of the world and how
    this may be known ([AN
    9.38](https://suttacentral.net/an9.38/en/sujato), [SN
    12.48](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.48/en/sujato)).

[^51]: The commentary has
   *saṅkiraṇa*/*vikiraṇa* as "saving and
    spending" (cp. [Snp
    1.6:23.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.6/en/sujato#23.1)), but it
    seems unlikely. *Vikiraṇa* means "scattering" food or
    sand, while Sanskrit *vikira* is the ritual scattering of rice.
    Given the context, I think it refers to the custom of scattering
    rice at a wedding. \| For *viruddhagabbhakaraṇa*,
   *viruddha* means "obstructed". The commentary here, in general
    agreement with the Niddesa on *gabbhakaraṇa* at [Snp
    4.14](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.14/en/sujato), explains as
    giving treatments for the survival of the fetus. \| I omit
   *hanujappana* as it is absent from the commentary and seems to have
    just arisen by confusion.

[^52]: Medicine is right livelihood, but a mendicant should not make a
    living from it. They may treat fellow mendicants, family members, or
    those close to the monastery. \| *Santikamma* is the Sanskrit
   *śāntikakarman*, a rite for averting evil. \| For
   *vassakamma* and *vossakamma*, the commentary has "fertile and
    infertile men" (*vassoti puriso, vossoti paṇḍako*),
    taking "rain" as a metaphor for semen. Such usages do have precedent
    elsewhere. But in context I take *vassa* simply as "rain" and
   *vossa* as equivalent to Sanskrit *vyavasya* in the sense of making
    a settlement for land. \| I take *paṭimokkho* in the
    sense of "binding" (cf. *paṭimukka* at [MN
    38:41.11](https://suttacentral.net/mn38/en/sujato#41.11) etc.)
    rather than the commentary's "release" (from the effects of caustic
    medicines; cf. [Tha Ap
    25:5.4](https://suttacentral.net/tha-ap25/en/sujato#5.4)).

[^53]: One meaning of *dhamma* is "principle" in the sense of a natural
    law as well as a moral value. \| Here begins the famous exposition
    of the sixty-two views. The subtlety of the analysis lies in how,
    rather than refuting the details of the views, the Buddha traces
    them all back to their fundamental psychology.

[^54]: In such contexts, the "self" (*attā*) is a
    postulated metaphysical entity rather than a simple psychological
    sense of personal identity. The nature of this "self" or "soul" was
    endlessly debated. The Buddha rejected all theories of a "self", and
    elsewhere it is said that "identity view" underlies all sixty-two
    views of the Brahmajāla ([SN
    41.3:4.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.3/en/sujato#4.13)). \| The
    "cosmos" is the *loka*, otherwise translated as "world". This
    sometimes refers to the simple physical realm, sometimes to the
    world of experience, or else, as here, the vast universe as
    conceived in ancient Indian thought.

[^55]: "Immersion" (*samādhi*) is deep meditative
    stillness. The word conveys the sense of "gathered", "collected",
    with a secondary sense of "ignited", "illuminated". The practice of
   *samādhi* (or *jhāna*, "absorption") has
    never been regarded as uniquely Buddhist. However, right meditation
    begins with right view. Since these meditators begin with wrong
    view, their *samādhi* is "wrong" because it merely
    reinforces their error.

[^56]: The recollection of past lives is specific, detailed, and
    confident as it is based on the clear mind of deep immersion.

[^57]: This is the Upaniṣadic view of the eternal
   *ātman* that is the immanent soul of the world or
    cosmos, *loka*. Elsewhere in the suttas such theorists assert that
    the self and the cosmos are identical ([SN
    24.3:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn24.3/en/sujato#1.3): *so
    attā so loko*).

[^58]: The eternal "self" is contrasted with the ephemeral lives of
    beings. \| The famous word *saṁsara* is often
    understood as a "cycle" of rebirths, but the meaning is, rather, to
    "wander on" or "transmigrate". \| For the phrase
   *sassatisamaṁ* ("lasting forever and ever"), compare
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 5.10.1: "He reaches
    that world free of sorrow and snow, where he lives forever and ever"
    (*sa lokam āgacchaty aśokam ahimam \|
    tasmin vasati śāśvatīḥ samāḥ*).

[^59]: Their meditative experience revealed a process of transient and
    changing lives, yet from that they infer that there must be an
    eternal self.

[^60]: This differs only in the length of time, which is now up to ten
    eons. A single eon (*kappa*) lasts longer than it would take to wear
    away a huge mountain by stroking it with a cloth once a century [SN
    15.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.5/en/sujato), while the number
    of eons is greater than the sands in the Ganges river [SN
    15.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.8/en/sujato). The vast time
    periods envisaged in early Buddhist texts are comparable with those
    of modern cosmology in physics.

[^61]: These theorists used a process of logic to arrive at the same
    conclusion as the meditators. Different groups of ascetic
    philosophers emphasized contemplation or rational inquiry as the
    means to the truth. The Buddha acknowledged that both are useful but
    limited because, as here, they can sometimes lead to mistaken
    conclusions.

[^62]: I have my doubts about this phrase. Everywhere else, *ito
    bahiddhā* means "outside of the Buddhist community",
    not "outside of the cases just considered". Still, the commentary
    and the Chinese parallel at T 21 agree on this sense.

[^63]: A "view" (*diṭṭhi*) is a relatively fixed framework
    for understanding the world; a "theory". The "grounds for views"
    (*diṭṭhiṭṭhānāni*) are the bases from which the views
    are derived. In this case these are the meditative experiences or
    the logical reasoning.

[^64]: The word *parāmasati* means "to take hold" and is
    often used in the sense "to misapprehend".

[^65]: *Yathābhūtaṁ* is often translated as "as it really
    is", while I usually render it simply as "truly". It often has a
    technical sense of seeing "how things came to be (*bhuta*)" as a
    process of conditionality ([SN
    12.31:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.31/en/sujato#7.1)). Such
    direct vision of the truth is an attribute of the stream-enterer,
    who has realized the first of the four stages of awakening, in
    contrast with those on the path who still rely on faith or inference
    ([SN 25.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn25.1/en/sujato)). Here it
    refers to the understanding of feelings from a fivefold perspective.
    Feelings underlie intellectual theories and arguments, which serve
    to sate cravings and fears.

[^66]: Long texts are sometimes marked by their "recitation sections"
    (*bhāṇavāra*), which was the length that would be
    recited in one session.

[^67]: Despite being views of the "self and the cosmos", the main focus
    in the next four views is the self.

[^68]: This is the end of an eon. It might be compared with what the
    physicists call the "big crunch".

[^69]: The human and similar realms are destroyed in the conflagration
    at the end of the universe, but sentient beings are sustained by the
    power of their past kamma. \| The "realm of streaming radiance" is a
    Brahmā heaven corresponding to the second
   *jhāna*.

[^70]: "Mind-made" (*manomaya*) beings are spontaneously born due to
    past kamma, not by sex. \| "Rapture" (*pīti*) is a
    joyous emotional response to pleasure, usually a spiritual sense of
    elevation or uplift in meditation.

[^71]: This might be compared with the "big bang" of a cyclic universe.

[^72]: The realms into which beings are reborn exist interdependently
    with the beings themselves. The different dimensions correspond with
    different kinds of kamma.

[^73]: That is, they pass from a world corresponding to the second
   *jhāna* to one corresponding to the first
   *jhāna*.

[^74]: This passage echoes the creation myth in
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4. At 1.4.2, the
    self-created Divinity feels fearful and alone, and at 1.4.3 and
    1.4.17 wishes for a partner. From a Buddhist point of view, this
    simply shows how even God is trapped by emotional attachments in the
    cycle of transmigration.

[^75]: These beings are reborn according to their own kamma, and it is
    just a coincidence that they appear after the first being made their
    wish.

[^76]: His first words *ahamasmi brahmā* ("I am
    Brahmā") are equivalent to *aham
    brahmāsmīti* at 1.4.10. See too
   *so'hamasmīti* ("I am that") at
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.1, which
    parallels the Pali *eso'hamasmi* at [MN
    28:6.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato#6.8) etc.

[^77]: At Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.5 the
    Divinity thinks, "I created all this".

[^78]: The other creatures appeared after his wish, not because of it.
    God confuses correlation with causation, a mistake perpetuated by no
    small number of his followers.

[^79]: At Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.9--10 the
    created humans also think first about the Divinity who preceded
    them, from whose knowledge of self all was created.

[^80]: Again, their meditation experience is genuine, but what they
    infer from it goes beyond the facts.

[^81]: The surviving forms of Indic religion (Buddhism, Hinduism,
    Jainism) typically hold that all creatures ultimately share the same
    nature and hence can find liberation. Here we see this was not
    always the case, for these theorists believed that there are
    inherently different orders of beings in the cosmos. This is not due
    to their conduct but to the circumstances of their creation.

[^82]: Delightful as the life of the gods is, even they are supposed to
    retain a sense of moderation ([MN
    37:11.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#11.2)), a lesson
    forgotten by those "depraved by play"
    (*khiḍḍāpadosikā*). \| Note that mindfulness (*sati*)
    is not held to be a specifically Buddhist virtue. Here it refers to
    a sense of moral compass and self-awareness, rather than a
    meditation practice.

[^83]: Here the difference in beings is attributed not to the
    circumstances of their creation but to their behavior.

[^84]: The parallel between *manopadosika* ("malevolent") and
   *khiddapadosika* ("depraved by play") suggests a rendering "depraved
    in mind" for *manopadosika*. However, elsewhere in the suttas
   *manopadosa* consistently means "malicious intent" ([MN
    56:13.15](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#13.15), [MN
    93:18.30](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#18.30), [DN
    26:20.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#20.3). Also see
   *mano padūseyya* at [MN
    21:20.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#20.1) and [MN
    28:9.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato#9.6). Thus the
    contrast is between greed and hate. \| Here, as usual, *mano* and
   *citta* are synonyms for "mind".

[^85]: This is mind-body dualism, the idea that the mind is made of a
    fundamentally different stuff than the body.

[^86]: Here we move from views that conceive of both the self and the
    cosmos together to those that focus only on the physical extent of
    the cosmos. It is not clear why these are classified as "views of
    the past".

[^87]: Once again the view is inferred from meditation, showing that
    meditative experience was regarded by some as revealing genuine
    truths about the physical realm.

[^88]: The nature of their meditation is assumed to be the nature of the
    world itself.

[^89]: In each of the two previous sets of four views, the views
    themselves were the same, only the means of knowing them differed.
    Here the views themselves differ. The differences take the form of a
    tetralemma: A, not-A, both A and not-A, neither A nor not-A. This
    pattern is commonly found in early Buddhism, as well as Indian
    thought more generally. The final two items are not meant to be
    obscure or mysterious, but to express genuine possibilities that
    cannot be captured by a simple duality.

[^90]: It is common today to say that one's own experience is valid for
    oneself. Clearly that is not how these philosophers thought.

[^91]: They perceive the universe as spread out like a disc. One might
    call it a "discworld".

[^92]: The text doesn't specify what this is, but it might include the
    view that the ideas "finite" and "infinite" are inadequate to
    describe the universe. Consider a universe expanding at the speed of
    light. At any point in time it is not infinite, but as it is
    impossible to reach its end it is not finite either.

[^93]: *Vikkhepa* is "ﬂip-flopping". \| *Amarā* is
    explained in the commentary as either "undying" or "eel-like".
    However, *amarā* in the sense of "eel" is found only in
    the commentary to this term so is probably spurious.

[^94]: This is a basic requirement for any spiritual teacher.

[^95]: Despite their dullness, they have a genuine sense of conscience
    and wish to avoid breaking precepts.

[^96]: A wise teacher avoids making pronouncements about what they do
    not understand, but these teachers use this as a cover to hide the
    fact that they do not understand anything.

[^97]: Here too they show a certain sincerity to avoid giving rise to
    unwholesome qualities.

[^98]: They avoid making statements, not from a sense of conscience, but
    for fear of public shaming.

[^99]: Also at [MN
    76:30.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn76/en/sujato#30.2).

[^100]: Here begins a series of four tetrads that are commonly
    encountered in the suttas. The first is the belief in an afterlife.

[^101]: The denial of an afterlife.

[^102]: This could include a belief that eternal life is offered only to
    adherents of a certain religion.

[^103]: This could include the idea that our intrinsic nature is one
    with the cosmos, and our separation from that infinitude in this
    life is only a veil of delusion. Thus there is no other world,
    because all worlds are this world, but it is also not the case that
    there is nothing after death.

[^104]: This is beings such as the gods or various ghosts and spirits,
    which are not born organically.

[^105]: This denies the existence of such beings. Not everyone in
    ancient India believed in the various orders of beings.

[^106]: The belief that beings are both spontaneously born and
    organically born. Perhaps this denies that such a distinction can be
    made clearly, because both kinds of birth take place within the same
    order of beings.

[^107]: Beings are reborn in other ways.

[^108]: This is the standard Buddhist view of kamma, shared with some,
    but not all, of the other Indian religions of the time.

[^109]: Doing good or bad has no result; moral nihilism.

[^110]: Sometimes good and bad deeds have results, other times not.

[^111]: The results of actions are too subtle to be described as good or
    bad.

[^112]: An awakened one, whether the Buddha or anyone else, exists after
    death, for example in an eternal state of Nirvana.

[^113]: A sage ceases to exist at the time of death. From a Buddhist
    point of view, this is incoherent since it assumes the underlying
    attachment to a "self", which the Realized One has done away with.

[^114]: For example, their body does not exist but their mind does.

[^115]: A sage is in a subtle state that cannot be characterized in
    terms of existence or non-existence.

[^116]: This is an obscure realm of existence where the operations of
    consciousness are suspended.

[^117]: First each section is concluded, then the whole first part is
    concluded. This formalism is a characteristic of oral tradition. It
    creates a nested hierarchy of content, clarifying the structure and
    helping to preserve the text in memory.

[^118]: This section introduces more tetralemmas. Many of the views
    describe the self in terms of the five aggregates---form, feeling,
    perception, choices, and consciousness.

[^119]: Usually a self is conceived of as percipient, so that the
    subject experiences a continuity. \| The term *aroga* ("free of
    disease") is explained by the commentary as "permanent" (*nicca*),
    drawing on the root sense of the word, "unbroken". However, *aroga*
    is always used in the sense "free of disease, well, healthy" (eg.
    [MN 97:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn97/en/sujato#2.4)), and this
    applies to the Brahmanical tradition as well as the Buddhist.
    Chandogya Upaniṣad 7.26.2 says that one who sees (the
    self) does not see death, they have no disease or pain.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.12 similarly
    says that one who sees the self will not suffer in the wake of the
    body, which Śaṅkāra explains, "Struggling with desires
    for himself, for his son, for his wife, and so on, he is born and
    dies again and again, and is diseased when his body is diseased."

[^120]: Here the self has a physical dimension but no perception. This
    might include rebirth as a plant or inanimate object.

[^121]: Buddhism acknowledges a formless realm of neither perception nor
    non-perception, which is attained through advanced meditation.

[^122]: These theorists assert the true existence of a being, thus
    falling into the fallacy of identity view. For the Buddha, the words
    "being" or a "self" describe an ongoing process that is conditioned
    and impermanent, and do not correspond to a genuine metaphysical
    reality. The distinction between contingent, empirical reality and
    metaphysical, absolute existence is essential to understanding early
    Buddhism.

[^123]: This is the materialist view, which accepts only the coarse
    physical realm. This view is common today, but was also well known
    in the Buddha's time. \| The "four principal states" are earth,
    water, fire, and air, i.e. the states of matter: solid, liquid,
    plasma, and gas.

[^124]: The theorist accepts multiple selves. As self theories evolve,
    they typically move from more coarse materialist theories towards
    more subtle conceptions. Sometimes the former view is rejected as
    being false. Sometimes, as here, the former view is seen not as
    false, but as incomplete and shallow.

[^125]: "Form" (*rūpa*) includes not just the physical
    realm of the elements, but various kinds of subtle form
    (*sukhumarūpa*). These include the energetic or
    mind-made bodies of beings in various dimensions.
   *Rūpa* ultimately refers to the appearance or
    manifestation of physical properties, and can even include the
    perception of colors, lights, and shapes in the mind. Here the
    bodies of the divine beings are not very distant from our own, as
    they still consume solid food. This probably refers to various
    nature deities or entities that were believed to consume the food
    offered to them by humans.

[^126]: Whereas the eternalists believe that their heavenly rebirth will
    last forever, annihilationists believe that even heaven is limited,
    and it ends in final annihilation.

[^127]: This is a more subtle kind of divine rebirth, no longer
    dependent on physical food. The subtle body still takes on a
    humanoid form, however, appearing complete in all its limbs. It
    includes realms produced through the practice of the four
   *jhānas*. \| *Sabbaṅga* has the sense
    "whole and healthy of limb" (Rig Veda 10.161.5c, Atharva Veda
    8.2.8c, 11.3.32 ff.). One is reborn with "whole body" (*sarvatanu*,
    Atharva Veda 5.6.11c, Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 11.1.8.60,
    12.8.3.31). \| *Paccaṅga* means "minor limb", for
    example the fingers or internal organs.

[^128]: Such a rebirth has left even the subtle body behind, becoming
    sheer consciousness. \| The word *āyatana* is from a
    root meaning "expanse". It is prominently used in this context,
    where it refers to a realm or "dimension" of rebirth, and in the
    analysis of sense experience, where it refers to a "field" of sense
    experience.

[^129]: This phrase appears incongruous as formless beings do not have a
    body. However the Chinese parallel at DA 21 does not mention
   *kāya* here, so it is likely to have arisen as an error
    in transmission where an earlier phrase was mistakenly copied.

[^130]: The extension of the normal description of this state with the
    phrase "this is peaceful, this is sublime" is found only here and at
    [AN 10.99:35.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.99/en/sujato#35.1).

[^131]: These five theories argue for the extinguishment of suffering
    through the experience of pleasure in the present life. The Buddha
    taught extinguishment (*nibbāna*) in this very life,
    but not "of an existing being" (*sato sattassa*) or "self"
    (*attā*). The Buddha denied that there is such a thing,
    pointing out that we are a stream of ever-changing conditions,
    fueled by desire and attachment, and liable to suffering. With the
    end of craving there is no fuel to sustain the stream, so suffering
    comes to an end. \| It is unclear why these views of the "present
    life" (*diṭṭhadhamma*) are classified under views of
    the future; see [MN
    102:2.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn102/en/sujato#2.8).

[^132]: The hedonist.

[^133]: Here we see the philosophical reasoning that prompts the
    evolution of more refined conceptions of self.

[^134]: The "absorptions" (*jhāna*) are central to Buddhist
    meditation. The Buddha did say that they can be considered
    "extinguishment in the present life" in a qualified sense ([AN
    9.51](https://suttacentral.net/an9.51/en/sujato)). As we have seen
    above, however, if they are undertaken with wrong view, the
    experience itself will tend to reinforce the attachment to a self.

[^135]: The theorist has an experience of a deeper state of meditation,
    so they know that the first *jhāna* cannot be the
    ultimate.

[^136]: *Jhānas* are subtle states of refined consciousness
    in which nothing is coarse when compared to ordinary consciousness.
    Within each state, however, certain mental factors are coarse
    relative to others. A meditator proceeds through the
   *jhānas* with the successive stilling of the relatively
    coarser factors in each state.

[^137]: *Ābhoga* ("partaking") is unique in the early texts in this
    sense. The commentary says that after emerging from
   *jhāna*, one repeatedly partakes and attends to that
    bliss (for *ābhoga* with *manasikāra*, see
    [Mil 5.1.1:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/mil5.1.1/en/sujato#8.3)).
    Compare Patañjalī's commentary on
    Yogasūtra 1.17: "*vitarka* is the gross (*sthula*)
    partaking in the mental object, *vicāra* is subtle".

[^138]: It is not clear why the still more subtle states of the formless
    attainments are not included here.

[^139]: Even the views of annihilation or extinguishment lead to
    rebirth, contrary to the beliefs of those who hold them.

[^140]: Here the Buddha brings to the fore the notion of feelings which
    has been briefly mentioned throughout the text. Views are not
    objective descriptions of the world, but responses to our innermost
    needs. The word *paritassita* ("anxiety") conveys both fear and
    desire, while *vipphandita* ("evasiveness") captures how attachment
    to theorizing serves as an avoidance strategy.

[^141]: The analysis is introducing more elements of dependent
    origination. The famous twelve links say that contact is the
    condition for feeling, which in turn causes craving.

[^142]: The text repeats all, but I abbreviate for legibility. In the
    oral tradition, extensive repetitions serve to reinforce the
    learning and ensure reliability of transmission. More subtly, they
    also help deepen understanding and contemplation. After reciting the
    extensive and complex treatment of the sixty-two views, the reciter
    takes the time to go over them again and again, letting them settle
    and consolidate. True learning takes time, but the repetitions that
    are reflective and reassuring in recitation become irksome and
    ponderous in reading.

[^143]: Finally the process of dependent origination, which has been
    foreshadowed little by little, is brought to its ultimate
    conclusion. It still does not include the full twelve factors, but
    the process beginning with ignorance is implied throughout.

[^144]: "Contact" (*phassa*) is the conjunction of the sense stimulus,
    the sense organ, and the associated consciousness.

[^145]: They cannot see a way past attachment so long as they theorize
    in terms of an existing self.

[^146]: The title is explained with a vivid simile. The Buddha was a
    master of observation, and constantly drew from everyday experience
    to illustrate his teachings. The metaphor works on a surface level
    to illustrate how theorists are trapped. But it also conveys
    something deeper, a sense of pathos and empathy with the helpless
    creatures who have no idea why they suffer.

[^147]: The Buddha is not his body, which is merely the remnant of past
    kamma. The phrase *bhavanetti* ("conduit to rebirth") invokes a
    channel that leads to a future life.

[^148]: This metaphor is found at Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 4.3.36, where it refers to the separation of
    the self from the body at death.

[^149]: It is not uncommon to find multiple names for the same sutta,
    and here we see this practice originated with the Buddha himself.
    When is referred to by name at [SN
    41.3:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.3/en/sujato#2.4) and [Kd
    1:1.8.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.8.8),
    however, it is always called the Brahmajāla.

[^150]: This sutta with its commentary was translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi
    in his *The Fruits of Recluseship*.

[^151]: This monastery belonged to the Buddha's doctor,
    Jīvaka, who appears later in the sutta. His story is
    told in [Kd 8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd8/en/sujato), where
    we learn that he was raised by Prince Abhaya of Magadha, a Jain ([MN
    58](https://suttacentral.net/mn58/en/sujato)) who was also
    interested in the teachings of Pūraṇa Kassapa ([SN
    46.56](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.56/en/sujato)). [MN
    55](https://suttacentral.net/mn55/en/sujato) on eating meat is
    addressed to him.

[^152]: The Komudī was an especially celebrated full moon
    on the last month of the rainy season (*kattikā*,
    October/November), when the skies were clear, the lotuses
    (*kumudā*) were in bloom, and the moon was in
    conjunction with the Pleiades, which gave the month its name.

[^153]: *Ajātasattu* ("one against whom no foe is born")
    was the son of Bimbisāra and heir to the
    Haryaṅka dynasty of Magadha. In inscription and Jain
    tradition he is also called Kūṇika. Jain tradition
    holds that his mother was Cellaṇā daughter of
    Ceṭaka, a Licchavī ruler from
    Vesālī. This begs the question as to why
    Cellaṇā was said to be "of Videha"; perhaps he married
    a Videhan princess to forge an alliance with the
    Licchavī's northern neighbors. In any case, this is
    more plausible than the Buddhist tradition that his mother was
    Kosalan.

[^154]: *Pāsādikā* here does not mean "tranquil"; it is
    part of a stock list of terms meaning "beautiful, attractive" (eg.
    [DN 4:13.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#13.7)). \|
   *Lakkhaññā* is unique in early Pali. It is probably a
    synonym in the sense of "possessing remarkable features, striking",
    rather than "auspicious".

[^155]: The king seeks redemption through his own actions; it is not
    that the ascetic has any special power to bring peace to his mind.
    \| The sutta is deliberately holding back the reason for the king's
    distress. Compare [AN
    5.50](https://suttacentral.net/an5.50/en/sujato), where the reason
    for King Muṇḍa seeking solace is stated up front.

[^156]: Though the king mentioned "ascetics and brahmins", his advisers
    only recommend famous teachers of the ascetics
    (*samaṇa*). For a shorter survey of their doctrines,
    see [SN 2.30](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.30/en/sujato).

[^157]: A little-known teacher of the inefficacy of action and
    consequence, Pūraṇa was poorly regarded even by his own
    students ([MN
    77:6.19](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#6.19)). He is said
    to have advocated a doctrine of six classes of rebirth ([AN
    6.57](https://suttacentral.net/an6.57/en/sujato); the same text
    reverentially mentions Makkhali Gosāla). \|
   *Pūraṇa* means "filling" (not *purāṇa*,
    "ancient").

[^158]: The reason for the king's silence is revealed later. The
    narrative is full of foreshadowing.

[^159]: Founder of the Ājīvakas, who became the third
    largest ascetic movement after Buddhism and Jainism. None of their
    texts survive, but their teachings can be partially reconstructed
    from Buddhist and Jain sources. He practiced with
    Mahāvīra for six years before an acrimonious split,
    following which he developed his doctrine of hard determinism.
   *Makkhali* denotes a kind of ascetic bearing a bamboo staff, so
    (like the similar appellations *nigaṇṭha* and
   *samaṇa*) it indicates his affiliation. This being so,
    and noting that Buddhist Sanskrit texts spell his name as
   *gośālīputra* etc., the second name (like
   *nātaputta* and *gotama*) might indicate his clan.
    However, I can find no trace of such a clan, and both Jain and
    Buddhist tradition, albeit unreliably, say the name arose because he
    was born in a cowshed.

[^160]: A materialist, he was an early proponent of the ideas later
    known as Cārvāka. *Kesakambala* means "hair-blanket",
    which was worn as an ascetic practice ([AN
    3.137](https://suttacentral.net/an3.137/en/sujato)).

[^161]: Another obscure teacher, he taught a reductive atomism which
    negated the possibility of action with consequences. His first name
    is sometimes spelled Kakudha; both words signify a hump or crest.

[^162]: An agnostic, he is evidently the "wanderer Sañjaya"
    who was the first teacher of Sāriputta and
    Moggallāna before they left him to follow the Buddha
    ([Kd
    1:23.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#23.1.1)).
    His name is obscure. Sanskrit spells it
   *vairaṭṭīputra*, with several variations, but always
    with *ṭi*. The commentary says he was the "son of
    Belaṭṭha"; a Belaṭṭha Kaccāna
    is found selling sugar at [Kd
    1:26.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#26.1.2),
    supporting the idea that Belaṭṭha was a personal rather
    than clan name.

[^163]: The Jain leader Mahāvīra Vardhamāna is
    known as Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta in Pali texts.
    He is regarded as the 24th supreme leader of the Jains, although
    only he and his predecessor Pārśvanātha (not mentioned
    in the Pali) are historical. *Nigaṇṭha* means
    "knotless" (i.e. without attachments). As a term for Jain ascetics
    it is also found in Jain literature. Nātaputta
    indicates his clan the Ñātikas (Sanskrit
   *jñātiputra*; Prākrit
   *nāyaputta*). The Pali tradition has confused
   *ñāti* ("family") with *nāṭa* ("dancer").
    Thus Nigaṇṭha Nātaputta means "the Jain
    monk of the Ñātika clan". \| Jainism and Buddhism are
    the only ancient *samaṇa* movements to survive to the
    present day. The primary Jain teaching is the practice of
    non-violence while burning off past kamma by fervent austerities in
    order to reach omniscient liberation.

[^164]: His absence of speech signifies his wisdom. The narrative
    creates a dramatic expectation through his stillness, an exquisitely
    Buddhist aesthetic choice.

[^165]: According to the Vinaya, a monastery is normally offered to the
    "Saṅgha of the four quarters" and becomes their
    inalienable property. In the suttas this is not so clear, and it
    seems that Jīvaka still regarded the property as his.
    In practice there would have been a variety of arrangements, as
    there are today.

[^166]: The first appearance of the famous *iti pi so* formula. It is
    still recited in praise of the Buddha in Theravada communities.

[^167]: Indian kings were guarded by armed women inside the harem
    (Kauṭilya's Arthaśāstra 1.21.1) and also
    while on hunt (Megasthenes's Indica, via Strabo XV. i. 53--56). This
    passage may be the earliest evidence for this long-lasting practice.

[^168]: The silence of the Buddha's assembly is often contrasted with
    the rowdy gatherings of other ascetics, for example that of
    Poṭṭhapāda at [DN
    9:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#3.1).

[^169]: This is a double pun. *Dīpa* means "lamp" or
    "island, refuge", while *jhāyati* means "burning" or
    "meditating". So it could be rendered, "those are saviors meditating
    in the pavilion". *Jhāyati* is the verb form of
   *jhāna* ("absorption"), which is the central practice
    of meditation described below.

[^170]: The Buddha looked like any other monk. But this also reveals
    Ajātasattu's spiritual blindness.

[^171]: He has not yet gained faith, so does not bow.

[^172]: The Buddha, though fully aware of Ajātasattu's
    crimes, responds to him with compassion.

[^173]: Most translators render *sippa* as "craft". However, the basic
    meaning of "craft" is skill in doing or making things. What is meant
    here is a paid occupation regardless of whether it involves making
    things, i.e. "profession".

[^174]: These are the professions on Ajātasattu's mind. The
    first set of these is defined as branches of the military at [AN
    7.67](https://suttacentral.net/an7.67/en/sujato).

[^175]: The question pertains to right livelihood, the fifth factor of
    the noble eightfold path.

[^176]: The purpose of right livelihood is to bring happiness in this
    life and the next.

[^177]: Ajātasattu's question only pertains to happiness in
    this life. He would have seen ascetics living hard and austere lives
    for the sake of future happiness.

[^178]: The term "Great King" (*mahārāja*) identifies
    Ajātasattu as the hereditary monarch of a large realm,
    in contrast with the multiple elected "rulers" of the aristocratic
    republics such as Vajji and Sakya.

[^179]: As in [DN
    1:1.4.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.4.2), the Buddha
    begins by asking to hear what others have said.

[^180]: As with his meeting with the Buddha, Ajātasattu is
    respectful but not reverential.

[^181]: This is a denial of the doctrine of kamma. While his doctrine
    appears to be morally nihilistic, it seems unlikely this was
    Pūraṇa Kassapa's full teaching. He may have subscribed
    to hard determinism, so that we have no choice in what we do. He may
    also have believed that we should keep moral rules as a social
    contract, but that this had no effect on the afterlife. \| In such
    contexts, *kar-* means "punish, inflict" ([MN
    129:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn129/en/sujato#29.2)).

[^182]: The unsatisfying nature of the answers given by these teachers
    is also emphasized at [MN
    36:48.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato#48.4).

[^183]: Breadfruit is a starchy, fibrous fruit that is, needless to say,
    very different from a mango.

[^184]: Kings had a duty to protect all religions in their realm, even
    those with such extreme views.

[^185]: The commentary takes *uggahita* and *nikkujjita* as synonyms.
    Elsewhere, however, *nikkujjati* always means "overturns".

[^186]: This denies the principle of causality and the efficacy of
    action. The fatalistic teachings of the Ājīvikas led to
    them becoming popular as prognosticators.

[^187]: The first three phrases, with the Magadhan nominative singular
    in *-e*, are unique to this passage. In [AN
    6.38:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/an6.38/en/sujato#1.4) we find the
    regular nominative form in *-o*. They are omitted in the otherwise
    parallel passage at [MN
    76:13.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn76/en/sujato#13.6).

[^188]: Everything is destined by circumstances beyond our control.

[^189]: This strange cosmology lays out the course through which souls
    must proceed before their final liberation. \| Since
   *nāgāvāsa* ("abode of dragons") occurs in a list of
    kinds of ascetics, I think it is a corruption of
   *naggāvāsa* ("abode of naked ascetics") and translate
    accordingly. Each of these refers to the number of times one will be
    reborn in each of these states. \| *Nigaṇṭhigabbha*
    could mean "rebirth as a Jain ascetic" but here we have moved on
    from listing ascetics, and I think it refers to one who is born free
    of attachments. Compare the Buddhist idea of "four kinds of
    conception" ([DN
    33:1.11.175](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.11.175)). \|
   *Pavuṭā* is explained by the commentary as
   *gaṇṭhikā* ("knot"). However, Rig Veda 9.54.2 mentions
    "seven rivers" (*sapta pravata*) that flow from heaven, preceded in
    the same verse by the mention of *sarā* ("lakes"). This
    detail suggests a Vedic influence. The "seven rivers" are normally
    called *sapta sindhu* (Rig Veda 1.35.8) in reference to the river
    systems of north-west India and Pakistan (cf. Punjab, "five
    rivers").

[^190]: To "force unripened deeds to bear their fruit" by means of
    "fervent austerity" (*tapas*) is a Jain practice, whereas to
    "eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little"
    is distinguished from the Jain view at [AN
    3.74](https://suttacentral.net/an3.74/en/sujato).

[^191]: "Purification through transmigration" is
   *saṁsārasuddhi*.

[^192]: The denial of "mother and father" is usually interpreted as the
    denial of moral duty towards one's parents. However, I think it is a
    doctrine of conception which denies that a child is created by the
    mother and father. Rather, the child is produced by the four
    elements, with parents as mere instigators and incubators.

[^193]: This is a materialist analysis of the person. \| The word
   *kāya* ("substance") is central to Jainism.
    Ācārāṅgasūtra 8.1.11 speaks of the "substances" of
    earth, water, fire, and air as being imbued with life so one should
    avoid damaging them. \| The Buddha's use of *mahābhūtā*
    ("principal states") responds to Yājñavalkya's core
    teaching at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.4.12,
    where the several "states" or "real entities"
    (*bhūtā*)---namely the diverse manifestations of
    creation---arise from and dissolve into the "principal state"
    (*mahābhūta*) of the Self, singular and infinite. For
    the Buddha, the "principal states" are themselves plural, as there
    is no underlying singular reality. Later Sanskrit literature lists
    the "five states" (*pañcabhūta*) as earth, water, fire,
    air, and space.

[^194]: This is a reductive atomism. It argues that since all things are
    made of the seven fundamental substances (*kāya*),
    higher-order entities have no significance.

[^195]: Unlike the materialism of Ajita Kesakambala, one of the basic
    substances is the soul. He uses *jīva*, the same term
    used by the Jains, rather than *attā* as preferred by
    the brahmins. Likewise, the Jains held a similar doctrine of six
    uncreated and eternal "substances" (*kāya* or
   *dravya*): soul, the media for motion and rest, matter, space, and
    time.

[^196]: Compare [AN
    8.16:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an8.16/en/sujato#1.3).

[^197]: While this is a genuine Jain teaching, it has not been
    identified as a "fourfold restraint". [DN
    25:16.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato#16.3) preserves
    another "fourfold restraint" that is closer to that found in
    Jainism. At [MN
    12:44.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#44.1) the Buddha
    says he once practiced a "four-factored spiritual path" that
    consisted of Jain-like austerities.

[^198]: At Isibhāsiyāiṁ 29.19, Vardhamāna
    (Mahāvīra) teaches that a sage is
   *savva-vārīhiṁ vārie*, "restrained in all
    restraints", which clearly parallels our current passage. In that
    passage, "restraint" refers to stopping the influx of defilements
    through the five senses, neither delighting in the pleasant nor
    loathing the unpleasant. Similarly we find
   *vāriya-savva-vāri* in the commentary to
    Sūyagaḍa 1.6.28. \| Read *vāri* as future
    passive participle (cf. Sanskrit *vārya*). \| *Dhuta*
    in the sense "shaken off (evil by means of ascetic practices)" is a
    characteristic Jain term. \| For *sabbavāriphuṭo*
    compare *ophuṭo* at [MN
    99:15.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#15.5). In both
    cases *phuṭ* appears in a string of terms from the root
   *var*, and is possibly a corrupted form, or at least has the same
    meaning.

[^199]: This places him among the "endless flip-floppers" of [DN
    1:2.23.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.23.1). However,
    we do not know on which of the four grounds he justified his
    evasiveness.

[^200]: The Buddha answers directly, with confidence. This whole passage
    is a masterclass in effective dialogue.

[^201]: He engages Ajātasattu rather than lecturing him.

[^202]: See *mukhaṁ ullokentī* at [MN
    79](https://suttacentral.net/mn79/en/sujato) and [SN
    56.39](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.39/en/sujato).

[^203]: Even a servant believed in the doctrine of kamma.

[^204]: There is no question of the divinity of kings.

[^205]: The doctrine of kamma leads to living a better life, not stewing
    in resentment.

[^206]: [Kd
    1:47.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#47.1.1)
    penalizes the ordination of bondservants or slaves, despite the fact
    that Ajātasattu's father, Bimbisāra, had
    ordered that no action was to be taken against any bondservant who
    ordained under the Buddha.

[^207]: Here the Buddha foreshadows the larger themes detailed later.

[^208]: Even under a king so compromised as Ajātasattu, a
    runaway slave who has ordained is rewarded not punished.

[^209]: In contrast with the former teachers, the Buddha gives a clear
    answer in terms that Ajātasattu would understand.

[^210]: The Buddha establishes common ground with the king before
    venturing into deeper waters.

[^211]: By starting with a very basic and obvious fruit, the Buddha
    stimulates Ajātasattu to seek a deeper answer.

[^212]: *Karakārako rāsivaḍḍhako* is a unique
    phrase. For *karakāraka*, compare [MN
    57:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn57/en/sujato#2.3), where a naked
    ascetic "does a hard thing". *Rāsi* means "heap" (of
    grain or wealth according to the commentary).

[^213]: The bonded servant had no wealth or family to renounce, but the
    worker does.

[^214]: Having established the king's genuine interest and
    understanding, the Buddha prepares him for the long discourse to
    follow.

[^215]: This is the start of the teaching on the Gradual Training,
    encompassing ethics (*sīla*), meditation
    (*samādhi*), and wisdom (*paññā*). Only
    the ethics portion appeared in the Brahmajālasutta,
    while all three are restated in all the remaining suttas of this
    chapter, although in truncated form. \| It is exceedingly rare for a
    Buddha to appear.

[^216]: The Buddha realizes the truth by his own understanding, not
    through divine intervention or other metaphysical means.

[^217]: It is good when first heard, when practicing, and when one has
    realized the fruits.

[^218]: The word "householder" (*gahapati*) informally refers to any lay
    person, but more specifically indicates someone who owns a house,
    i.e. a person of standing. The renunciate life is not just for
    slaves or workers wishing to escape their station.

[^219]: This serves as a table of contents for the teachings to come. \|
    Nowadays, the "monastic code" (*pātimokkha*) means the
    list of rules for monks and nuns found in the
    Vinayapiṭaka. In the early texts, however, it has three
    main meanings. Sometimes it does refer to the list of rules, as at
    [AN 10.36:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/an10.36/en/sujato#1.6). Here
    it refers to the code of conduct that follows, which is a
    non-legalistic set of guidelines that preceded the
    Vinayapiṭaka. At [DN
    14:3.28.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.28.1) it refers
    to the verses summarizing monastic conduct known as the
    "Ovāda Pātimokkha".

[^220]: While the precept includes any living creature, if a monastic
    murders a human being they are immediately and permanently expelled.

[^221]: To steal anything of substantial value is an expulsion offence.

[^222]: Buddhist monastics are forbidden from any form of sexual
    activity. To engage in penetrative intercourse is an expulsion
    offence.

[^223]: While any form of lying is forbidden, if a monastic falsely
    claims states of enlightenment or deep meditation they are expelled.

[^224]: To avoid sleeping too much.

[^225]: This is the first step in the Buddha's answer to
    Ajātasattu. This is the sense of happiness and
    well-being that you have when you know you have done nothing wrong
    for which anyone might blame you. It is the psychological foundation
    for meditation.

[^226]: Here begins the series of practices that build on moral
    fundamentals to lay the groundwork for meditation.

[^227]: It is not that one cannot see things, but that, mindful of its
    effect, one avoids unnecessary stimulation. \| "Covetousness and
    bitterness" (*abhijjhā domanassā*) are the
    strong forms of desire and aversion caused by lack of restraint.

[^228]: Their happiness deepens, as they see that not only their actions
    but also their mind is becoming free of anything unwholesome.

[^229]: Situational awareness is a psychological term popularized in the
    1990s. It has to do with the perception of environmental phenomena
    and the comprehension of their meaning, which is very close to the
    sense of the Pali term *sampajañña*.

[^230]: These acts describe the daily life of a mendicant: going into
    the village for alms, at which time there are many distracting
    sights. Then they return, eat their meal, and spend their day in
    meditation.

[^231]: A Buddhist monk has three robes: a lower robe (sabong or
    sarong), an upper robe, and an outer cloak.

[^232]: These are the prerequisite conditions for embarking on deep
    meditation.

[^233]: For *parimukha* ("in their presence") we find *pratimukha* in
    Sanskrit, which can mean "presence" or the reflection of the face.
    Late canonical Pali explains *parimukha* as "the tip of the nose or
    the reflection of the face (*mukhanimitta*)". *Parimukha* in
    Sanskrit is rare, but it appears in Pāṇini 4.4.29,
    which the commentary illustrates with the example of a servant "in
    the presence" of their master (cp. [SN
    47.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.8/en/sujato)). So it seems the
    sense is "before the face" or more generally "in the presence". \|
    To "establish mindfulness" (*satiṁ
    upaṭṭhapetvā*) is literally to "do
    satipaṭṭhāna".

[^234]: Covetousness (*abhijjha*) has been curbed by sense restraint,
    and now is fully abandoned.

[^235]: Likewise ill will (*byāpādapadosa*), which was
    called *domanassa* in the formula for sense restraint.

[^236]: "Mindfulness and situational awareness" has a prominent role in
    abandoning dullness.

[^237]: Restlessness hankers for the future and is countered by
    contentment. Remorse digs up the past and is countered by ethical
    purity.

[^238]: The meditator set out on their path after gaining faith in the
    Buddha.

[^239]: The happiness of meditation is hard to understand without
    practicing, so the Buddha gives a series of five similes to
    illustrate in terms Ajātasattu would understand.

[^240]: The five hindrances remain a pillar of meditation teaching. The
    root sense means to "obstruct" but also to "obscure, darken, veil".

[^241]: Each simile illustrates not the happiness of acquisition, but of
    letting go.

[^242]: The Buddha did not emphasize technical details of technique, but
    the emotional wholeness and joy that leads to deep meditation.

[^243]: *Jhāna* is a state of "elevated consciousness"
    (*adhicitta*), so all the terms have an elevated sense. \| The
    plural form indicates that "sensual pleasures" includes sense
    experience, which the meditator can turn away from since they no
    longer have any desire for it. \| The "unskillful qualities" are the
    five hindrances. \| The "rapture and bliss born of seclusion" is the
    happiness of abandoning the hindrances and freedom from sense
    impingement. \| "Placing the mind and keeping it connected"
    (*vitakka*, *vicāra*) uses terms that mean "thought" in
    coarse consciousness, but which in "elevated consciousness" refer to
    the subtle function of applying the mind to the meditation.

[^244]: As a meditator proceeds, their subjective experience of the
    "body" evolves from tactile sense impressions
    (*phoṭṭhabba*), to the interior mental experience of
    bliss and light (*manomayakāya*), to the direct
    personal realization of highest truth ([MN
    70:23.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn70/en/sujato#23.2):
   *kāyena ceva paramasaccaṁ sacchikaroti*).

[^245]: The kneading is the "placing the mind and keeping it connected",
    the water is bliss, while the lack of leaking speaks to the
    contained interiority of the experience. \| Here as elsewhere, water
    is used as a metaphor for the mind in absorption. Compare
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.32: "He becomes
    like water, one, the seer without duality; this is the world of
    Brahmā."

[^246]: The Buddha has answered Ajātasattu's question. But
    he is far from finished.

[^247]: Each *jhāna* begins as the least refined aspect of
    the previous *jhāna* ends. This is not consciously
    directed, but describes the natural process of settling. The
    meditator is now fully confident and no longer needs to apply their
    mind: it is simply still and fully unified.

[^248]: The simile emphasizes the water as bliss, while the lack of
    inflow expresses containment and unification.

[^249]: The water welling up is the rapture, which is the uplifting
    emotional response to the experience of bliss.

[^250]: The emotional response to bliss matures from the subtle thrill
    of rapture to the poise of equanimity. Mindfulness is present in all
    states of deep meditation, but with equanimity it becomes prominent.

[^251]: The meditator is utterly immersed in stillness and bliss.

[^252]: The emotional poise of equanimity leads to the feeling of
    pleasure settling into the more subtle neutral feeling. Pain and
    sadness have been abandoned long before, but are emphasized here as
    they are subtle counterpart of pleasure.

[^253]: The equanimity of the fourth *jhāna* is not
    dullness and indifference, but a brilliant and radiant awareness.

[^254]: The white cloth is the purity and brightness of equanimity. The
    commentary explains this as a person who has just got out of a bath
    and sits perfectly dry and content.

[^255]: Of the eight kinds of knowledge and vision, only the last is
    considered indispensable. The fourth *jhāna* is the
    ideal basis for developing higher knowledges, although elsewhere the
    canon shows that even the first *jhāna* can be a basis
    for liberating insight. Without *jhāna*, however, the
    eightfold path is incomplete and liberating insight is impossible.
    \| The verb *abhininnāmeti* ("extend") indicates that
    the meditator comes out of full immersion like a tortoise sticking
    out its limbs ([SN
    35.240:1.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.240/en/sujato#1.7)).

[^256]: This is the "coarse" (*olārika*) body. Note that
    its generation by mother and father contradicts the doctrine of
    Ajita Kesakambala. The obvious impermanence of the body invites the
    tempting but fallacious notion that the mind or soul is permanent,
    which is dispelled by deeper insight.

[^257]: This distinction should not be mistaken for mind-body dualism.
    These are not fundamental substances but experiences of a meditator.

[^258]: Strung gems were loved in India from the time in the Harappan
    civilization, millennia before the Buddha.

[^259]: This form of "knowledge and vision" is rarely mentioned, being
    found only here, at [DN
    10:2.21.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn10/en/sujato#2.21.3), and at
    [MN 77:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#29.2). The next
    realization, the "mind-made body" is also only found in these three
    suttas. \| The Mahāsaṅgīti edition adds the spurious
    title *vipassanāñāṇa* ("insight knowledge") to this
    section. This term does not appear anywhere in the Pali canon.

[^260]: The "mind-made body" is the interior mental representation of
    the physical body. In ordinary consciousness it is proprioception,
    which here is enhanced by the power of meditation. The higher powers
    in Buddhism are regarded as extensions and evolutions of aspects of
    ordinary experience, not as metaphysical realities separate from the
    world of mundane experience.

[^261]: This is similar to the experience of the "astral body" described
    by modern spiritualists. Note that it is still "physical"
    (*rūpī*) even though it is mind-made. This is the
    subtle (*sukhuma*) body, which is an energetic experience of
    physical properties by the mind.

[^262]: Here begin the "six direct knowledges"
    (*chaḷabhiññā*), which are found commonly throughout
    the early texts. \| "Psychic powers" (*iddhi*) were much cultivated
    in the Buddha's day, but the means to acquire them varied: devotion
    to a god, brutal penances, or magic rituals. The Buddha taught that
    the mind developed in *samādhi* was capable of things
    that are normally incomprehensible.

[^263]: Only a few of these are attested as events in the early texts.
    The most common is the ability to disappear and reappear, exhibited
    by the Buddha ([AN
    8.30:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato#2.1)), some
    disciples ([MN
    37:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#6.1)), and deities
    ([MN 67:8.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn67/en/sujato#8.1)).

[^264]: These similes hark back to the descriptions of the purified mind
    as pliable and workable.

[^265]: This simile is extended in detail at [AN
    3.101](https://suttacentral.net/an3.101/en/sujato).

[^266]: "Clairaudience" is a literal rendition of *dibbasota*. The root
    sense of *dibba* is to "shine" like the bright sky or a divine
    being. The senses of clarity and divinity are both present.

[^267]: The Buddha occasionally used this ability for teaching, as at
    [MN 75:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn75/en/sujato#6.1).

[^268]: The simile emphasizes the clarity and distinctness of the
    sounds. Compare [AN
    4.114](https://suttacentral.net/an4.114/en/sujato):
   *bheripaṇavasaṅkhatiṇavaninnādasaddānaṁ*.

[^269]: Note that the Indic idiom is not the "reading" of minds, which
    suggests hearing the words spoken in inner dialogue. While this is
    exhibited by the Buddha (eg. [AN
    8.30:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato#2.1)), the main
    emphasis is on the comprehension of the overall state of mind.

[^270]: Again the simile emphasizes how clear and direct the experience
    is. Without deep meditation, we have some intuitive sense for the
    minds of others, but it is far from clear.

[^271]: Here begins the "three knowledges" (*tevijjā*), a
    subset of the six direct knowledges. The first two of these play an
    important role in deepening understanding of the nature of suffering
    in *saṁsāra*. While they are not necessary for those
    whose wisdom is keen, they are helpful.

[^272]: Empowered by the fourth *jhāna*, memory breaks
    through the veil of birth and death, revealing the vast expanse of
    time and dispelling the illusion that there is any place of eternal
    rest or sanctuary in the cycle of transmigration. The knowledge of
    these events is not hazy or murky, but clear and precise,
    illuminated by the brilliance of purified consciousness.

[^273]: The word for "past life" is *pubbanivāsa*,
    literally "former home", and the imagery of houses is found in the
    second of the three knowledges as well. Recollection of past lives
    is as fresh and clear as the memory of a recent journey.

[^274]: Here knowledge extends to the rebirths of others as well as
    oneself. Even more significant, it brings in the understanding of
    cause and effect; *why* rebirth happens the way it does. Such
    knowledge, however, is not infallible, as the Buddha warns in [DN
    1:2.5.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.5.3) and [MN
    136](https://suttacentral.net/mn136/en/sujato). The experience is
    one thing; the inferences drawn from it are another. One should draw
    conclusions only tentatively, after long experience. \|
    "Clairvoyance" renders *dibbacakkhu* ("celestial eye"), for which
    see Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.12.5, "the mind
    is (the self's) celestial eye" (*mano'sya daivaṁ
    cakṣuḥ*).

[^275]: This simile is also found at [DN
    10:2.33.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn10/en/sujato#2.33.1). The
    Majjhima employs a slightly different simile ([MN
    39:20.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn39/en/sujato#20.3), [MN
    77:35.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#35.2), [MN
    130:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn130/en/sujato#2.1)). \|
   *Pāsāda* is often translated as "palace" or "mansion",
    but in early Pali it meant a "stilt longhouse". As here, it is an
    elevated place from which one can observe the street below.

[^276]: This is the experience of awakening that is the true goal of the
    Buddhist path. The defilements---properties of the mind that create
    suffering---have been curbed by the practice of ethics and
    suppressed by the power of *jhāna*. Here they are
    eliminated forever.

[^277]: These are the four noble truths, which form the main content of
    the Buddha's first sermon. They are the overarching principle into
    which all other teachings fall. The initial realization of the four
    noble truths indicates the first stage of awakening, stream-entry.

[^278]: The application of the four noble truths to defilements
    indicates that this is the final stage of awakening, perfection (or
    "arahantship", *arahatta*). \| Many translators use "defilement" to
    render *kilesa*, but since *kilesa* appears only rarely in the early
    texts, I use "defilement" for *āsava*. Both terms refer
    to a stain, corruption, or pollution in the mind.

[^279]: *Bhavāsava* is the defilement that craves to
    continue life in a new birth.

[^280]: This is a reflective awareness of the fact of awakening. The
    meditator reviews their mind and sees that it is free from all
    forces that lead to suffering.

[^281]: This is a standard declaration of full awakening in the suttas,
    said both of the Buddha and of any arahant ("perfected one"). Each
    of the four phrases illustrates a cardinal principle of awakening.
    (1) Further transmigration through rebirths has come to an end due
    to the exhaustion (*khīṇa*) of that which propels
    rebirth, namely deeds motivated by craving. (2) The eightfold path
    has been developed fully in all respects. (3) All functions relating
    to the four noble truths have been completed, namely: understanding
    suffering, letting go craving, witnessing extinguishment, and
    developing the path. (4) Extinguishment is final, with no falling
    back to this or any other state of existence. \| For "state of
    existence" (literally "thusness", *itthatta*), see [DN
    15:21.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#21.4).

[^282]: Once again the pool of water represents the mind, but now the
    meditator is not immersed in the experience, but looks back and
    reviews it objectively.

[^283]: The Buddha roars his lion's roar. His teaching leads not just to
    some benefits, but to the highest benefits that are possible.

[^284]: The king's distress has been alleviated by the Buddha's
    uplifting words.

[^285]: This is the standard form in which lay people went for refuge.
    It is not something that the Buddha required, but a spontaneous act
    of inspiration. Conventionally, it indicates that someone is a
    "Buddhist". Today Theravadins recite the going for refuge thrice,
    but in the early texts this is found only as the ordination for
    novices ([Kd
    1:12.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#12.4.1)).

[^286]: The king, unprompted, makes an astonishing confession. To say it
    in such a public forum, before a spiritual community and his own
    retinue, displays courage and integrity.

[^287]: The Buddha hears his confession, but it is
    Ajātasattu's responsibility to do better.

[^288]: Even before such a dangerous and emotionally volatile king, the
    Buddha does not mince words. The Buddha makes a point to acknowledge
    what the king had done, without dismissing it and thereby
    discounting the inner work he had achieved to get to this point.

[^289]: Confession does not erase the past, but it does set a better
    course for the future. This confession is similar to that done by
    monastics when they have broken Vinaya rules.

[^290]: These terms are commonly used in the context of keeping precepts
    (eg. [AN 3.50:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.50/en/sujato#4.1)).
    The Buddha is supportive when he speaks with
    Ajātasattu, but does not hide the severity of his
    crime.

[^291]: The killing of one's father is one of five "incurable" acts that
    doom a person to hell in the next life ([AN
    5.129:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.129/en/sujato#1.3)). If he
    had not done so, he would have become a stream-enterer.

[^292]: This sutta marks a turning point where the Buddha's teachings
    were embraced by the leading brahmin Pokkharasāti. The
    suttas that follow reverberate with the consequences of this
    encounter. He was one of the most influential brahmins of his time,
    although the Buddha elsewhere denied that he had any special
    knowledge ([MN
    99:15.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#15.5)). Brahmanical
    texts confirm that he was a real person, an influential teacher
    around the time of the Buddha known as Pauṣkarasādi in
    Sanskrit. He is cited on grammar by Kātyāyana and
    Patañjali, and in the
    Taittirīya-prātiśākhya; on allowable food
    and theft in the Āpastamba Dharmasūtra; and on Vedic ritual in the
    Śāṅkhāyana-Āraṇyaka. His name identifies
    him as descended from a man of Puṣkarāvati, capital of
    Gandhāra. [MN
    99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3) clarifies
    that he is of the Upamañña lineage.

[^293]: Icchānaṅgala was a center east of
    Sāvatthī for the innovative brahmins of the Kosala
    region.

[^294]: Ukkaṭṭhā is mentioned only rarely, and always in
    the context of extraordinary teachings and events that emphasize the
    cosmic grandeur of the Buddha against the brahmins ([DN
    14:3.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.29.1), [MN
    1:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn1/en/sujato#1.2), [MN
    49:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn49/en/sujato#2.1)). Sanskrit
    sources call it a *droṇamukha*, a leading market town
    accessible by land and water (Divyāvadāna 319.010). At
    [MN 99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3)
    Pokkharasāti is said to be "of the Subhaga Forest". \|
    "Royal park" is *rājadāya* (cp.
   *migadāya*, "deer park"). \| A *brahmadeyya* is a gift
    of land by a king to a brahmin, which was an outstanding feature of
    Indian feudalism.

[^295]: Contrast with his rejection of this possibility at [MN
    99:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.7).

[^296]: Pokkharasāti does not care whether the Buddha
    identified as a follower of the Vedas. The wise do not concern
    themselves with religious identity.

[^297]: "Vocabularies" is *nighaṇḍu* (Sanskrit
   *nighaṇṭu*), known from the Nirukta of
    Yāska. \| *Keṭubha* lacks an obvious
    Sanskrit form. The commentary explains, "The study of proper and
    improper actions for the assistance of poets." This suggests a
    connection with ritual performance, which is the special area of the
    Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. There we often find phrases such as
   *kṛtam bhavati*, "it is performed", of which
   *keṭubha* is perhaps a contraction. \| *Akkhara*
    (literally "syllable") is explained by the commentary as
   *sikkhā* (Sanskrit *śikṣā*), which is the
    study of pronunciation. This can be traced back to
    Pāṇinī, and is sometimes referred to as
   *akṣara-samāmnāya*, "collation of
    syllables". \| *Pabheda* is found in Buddhist Sanskrit texts as
   *padaprabheda*, "classification of words", such as into the
    different parts of speech. The commentary identifies it with
   *nirutti*. \| *Padaka* is one skilled in the
   *padapāṭha* recitation of Vedas, which separates the
    individual words. \| For "testaments" (*itihāsa*) see
   *itihāsa-purāṇa* in Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 11.5.6.8, explained by the commentator there
    as legends of creation and olden times. \| For "cosmology"
    (*lokāyata*), see note on [DN
    1:1.25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.25.2). \| For
    "authorized as a master" (*anuññātapaṭiññāta*) see [MN
    98:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#7.1) and [Snp
    3.9:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#6.1). \| For
    "scriptural heritage of the three Vedas" (*tevijjake
    pāvacane*) see [MN
    95:12.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#12.2).

[^298]: Almost the same words are spoken to the bodhisatta by his first
    teachers, Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka
    Rāmaputta ([MN
    36:14.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato#14.9)). This
    connects Pokkharasāti with Āḷāra
    Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta, and suggests
    that the anointing of a talented student in this way was a regular
    practice of wise brahmins.

[^299]: Following PTS and BJT editions of the parallel phrase at [MN
    91:4.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#4.9), which read
   *tayā* for *tathā*.

[^300]: The thirty-two marks are detailed in [DN
    14:1.32.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.32.7), [DN
    30:1.2.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.2.4), and [MN
    91:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#9.1). In Buddhist
    texts they are presented as the fulfillment of Brahmanical prophecy,
    but they are not found in any Brahmanical texts of the Buddha's
    time. However, later astrological texts such as the
    Gārgīyajyotiṣa (1st century BCE?) and
    Bṛhatsaṁhitā (6th century CE?) contain references to
    many of these marks, albeit in a different context, so it seems
    likely the Buddhist texts are drawing on now-lost Brahmanical
    scriptures. \| The notion of a two-fold course for a great
    hero---worldly success or spiritual---can be traced back as far as
    the epic of Gilgamesh.

[^301]: The idea of the wheel-turning monarch draws from the Vedic horse
    sacrifice, which establishes the authority of a king from sea to
    sea. The Buddhist telling is divested of all coarse and violent
    elements. The wheeled chariot gave military supremacy to the ancient
    Indo-Europeans, allowing them to spread from their ancient homeland
    north of the Black Sea. In Buddhism, the wheel, which also has solar
    connotations, symbolizes unstoppable power. For a legendary account
    of such a king, see the Mahāsudassanasutta ([DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato)).

[^302]: The sacrificial horse on its journey across the land is
    protected by a hundred sons.

[^303]: The relation between Pokkharasāti and
    Ambaṭṭha is similar to that between the Buddha and his
    followers. They share the same understanding, but the Buddha is
    distinguished as the teacher.

[^304]: In this sutta, *māṇava* is always applied to
    Ambaṭṭha and *māṇavaka* to the rest. It
    seems that the diminutive *māṇavaka* means "young
    student". \| There are said to be *sambahula* students, a word that
    is often translated as "many". But later we see that they all fit
    inside the Buddha's hut, so the sense must be "several".

[^305]: This is the practice of walking meditation. Meditators pace
    mindfully up and down a smooth path, keeping attention on their
    body.

[^306]: *Bho* is a respectful term of address used by brahmins. The
    forms of address used in Pali are complex, and it is rarely possible
    to map them to modern English with any precision.

[^307]: The parallel passage at [MN
    35:7.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#7.4) has a different
    phrase here.

[^308]: The term *kulaputta* (literally, "son of a family") typically
    refers to someone from a well-to-do or respected family, a
    "gentleman". It is a gendered term which assumes the social status
    of men.

[^309]: The introduction has told us that the Buddha was staying in a
    forest at this time. Nonetheless, this was not a wilderness, but was
    developed enough to have huts with latched doors.

[^310]: The Buddha draws attention to Ambaṭṭha's rude
    behavior. Throughout the suttas, the manner in which people greet
    the Buddha gives us a hint as to their attitudes and qualities.

[^311]: Note the racial connotations of using *kaṇha*
    ("black") as a slur. The brahmin caste hailed from the (relatively)
    fair-skinned Indo-Europeans who entered India from the north. Vedic
    texts indicate that there was Brahmanical prejudice against
    dark-skinned natives, but also that they were assimilated and raised
    to positions of honor.

[^312]: Ambaṭṭha is "qualified" (*vusita*) in scripture,
    but far from "qualified" in spiritual development. *Vusita* is
    normally an expression of arahantship: *vusitaṁ
    brahmacariyaṁ* ("the spiritual journey has been
    completed").

[^313]: The PTS reading *rabhasa* means "violent, aggressive". But the
    commentary reads *bhassa*, explained as "speaking much". Moreover,
    the story below does not demonstrate violence.

[^314]: Ambaṭṭha despises the Sakyans as "primitives"
    (*ibbha*) who do not respect Vedic culture. The word *ibbha*
    ("primitive") stems from a non-Aryan word for "elephant" (*ibha*).
    It originally referred to the native inhabitants who tamed
    elephants; see eg. Chāndogya Upaniṣad
    1.10. At [Snp
    3.1:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.1/en/sujato#18.4) the Buddha
    describes his own people as "natives" (*niketino*), those who have a
    long connection with the land.

[^315]: The Buddha's use of *āyasmā* is noteworthy here: he
    is taking a conciliatory tone.

[^316]: The Ambaṭṭhas were a people in the north-west of
    greater India (eg. Mahābhārata 7.4.5c, 7.132.23a). They
    were evidently the Abastanians whose rout at the hands of Alexander
    is recorded by Arrian (*The Anabasis of Alexander*, chapter 15).
    They were probably located near what is today the northern Sindh
    province in Pakistan. Later texts such as Manusmṛti 1.8
    say that an *ambaṣṭha* is born of a brahmin father and
   *vaiśya* mother.

[^317]: *Kaṇhāyana* means "descendant of the dark one
    (*kaṇha*)". Since no clan of that name is attested it
    is perhaps a confusion with the Kāṇvāyanas of Rig Veda
    8.55.4. But the confusion, if it is such, has an old history, for
    Rig Veda 1.117.8 refers to "Dark Kaṇva"
    (*Śyāva Kaṇva*).

[^318]: Normally I take *ayyaputta* as a simple honorific, but here the
    sense is not that the Sakyans were the masters, but were descended
    from them.

[^319]: Okkāka (Sanskrit Ikṣvāku) was the
    legendary son of the first man, Manu, and the founder of the solar
    dynasty of Kosala. It is a Munda name, which may be associated with
    the introduction of cane sugar (*ikṣuḥ*) from eastern
    Asia, a theory endorsed by the 9th century Jain scholar Jinasena
    (Natubhai Shah, *Jainism, the World of Conquerors*, 2004, vol. 1,
    pg. 15).

[^320]: The words for "teak" (*sāka*) and "sal"
    (*sāla*) have evidently been confused from the Munda
    root *sarja* (both appear at [MN
    93:11.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#11.6)). But teak
    does not grow so far north, so the sal must be meant here. To
    maintain the pun I use *sakhua*, which is an alternate Hindi name
    for the sal tree. This story suggests that when they settled in
    their northern home in the shadow of the Himalayas, harvesting sal
    was a primary source of wealth. Compare Gilgamesh, for whom Lebanese
    cedar was the foundation of his royal capital.

[^321]: "Own" is *saka*, the second pun on the Sakyan name. Incest is,
    of course, common among royal families for exactly the reason stated
    here. Marriage between cousins persisted even in the Buddha's day.
    \| For *sambheda* in the sense of "dissolving, leaking", see [AN
    2.9:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an2.9/en/sujato#1.5) = [DN
    26:20.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#20.2), [AN
    5.103:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an5.103/en/sujato#6.4), [AN
    10.45:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.45/en/sujato#4.1).

[^322]: For this sense of *sammati*, see [SN
    11.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.9/en/sujato), [SN
    11.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.10/en/sujato).

[^323]: This draws on both the puns above. But the commentary also
    explains *sakya* here as "capable" (*samatthā*,
   *paṭibalā*) in reference to their survival against all
    odds, thus connecting Sakya with *sakka* ("able").

[^324]: Vedic *dāsa* ("slave, bondservant") refers to the
    "dark-wombed" (*kṛṣṇayoni*, Rig Veda 2.20.7) foes of
    the Aryan peoples (Rig Veda 10.22.8) who upon defeat were enslaved
    (Rig Veda 10.62.10). The name *disā* therefore probably
    means "foe" (Sanskrit *dviṣa*).

[^325]: The passage wavers between treating *kaṇha*
    (Sanskrit *kṛṣṇa*, i.e. Krishna) as a personal name, a
    description, and a word for a goblin. I try to capture this
    ambiguity by using variations of "black boy". \| The passage does
    not say who the father was. According to Arthaśāstra
    3.13, a female slave is protected against sexual harassment by the
    master, but should she have a child by him, both mother and child
    are to be set free, and if the sex was not consensual, he must pay
    her a fine.

[^326]: Like Siddhattha, he spoke as soon as he was born. The boy was no
    common child, but had a larger destiny. His words are a dramatic
    contrast with Siddhattha's words of confident proclamation, and his
    birth which was devoid of filth or impurity.

[^327]: Lineage was important to brahmins, but the Brāhmaṇa
    and Upaniṣad literature shows that, as here, many were
    more concerned with conduct and wisdom than with birth.

[^328]: The threat of losing one's head is found at eg.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.3.24, or at
    3.9.26 when it actually did fall off. I cannot trace the detail of
    heads being split in seven to any early Sanskrit texts, but it is
    found in later texts such as Rāmāyaṇa 7.26.44c and
    Mahābhārata 14.7.2c.

[^329]: Vajirapāṇī ("lightning-bolt in hand") appears here
    and in the parallel passage at [MN
    35:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#14.1). The
    synonymous Vajrahasta (Pali *vajirahattha*, [DN
    20:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#12.1)) is a
    frequent epithet of Indra in the Vedas (eg. Rig Veda 1.173.10a:
   *indro vajrahastaḥ*), confirming the commentary's identification
    with Sakka. Much later, Mahayana texts adopted the name for a fierce
    Bodhisattva who was protector of the Dhamma.

[^330]: The contemptuous senses of "black boy" represent the
    conservative brahmanical view, presented not as endorsement, but as
    a rhetorical means to undermine Ambaṭṭha's pride. The
    Buddha now shows how a man of a supposedly low birth rose to great
    spiritual eminence.

[^331]: "Divine Spell" is *brahmamanta*, a term of unique occurrence in
    Pali. In modern Hinduism it is used for a verse of praise for
    Brahmā, but that is not what is meant here.
    Kaṇha is one of several "dark hermits" who accrued
    mighty and lineage-busting powers in the south.

[^332]: The Hindu deity Krishna won the hand of his seventh wife
    Lakṣmaṇā, also known as Madrī, at an
    archery contest. This detail is too precise to be a coincidence, and
    proves there must be some shared basis between the two figures.

[^333]: This draws on the ancient belief that the king's acts affect the
    natural order of things.

[^334]: This sequence seems to be an etiological myth explaining certain
    rites of kingship and succession, providing an origin story for this
    prayer.

[^335]: National prosperity is ensured through symbolic regicide. This
    example was omitted from Frazer's accounts of such substitute
    sacrifices. Here there is a double substitution: the prince
    substitutes for the king, then a threat substitutes for the act of
    killing. This suggests that, even from the legendary perspective of
    this story within a story, the rite was an ancient one that had
    evolved through multiple stages.

[^336]: The use of the bare personal name for the king is unusual.

[^337]: "Divine punishment" is *brahmadaṇḍa*, harking back
    to the Divine Spell (*brahmamantra*). The Buddha had his own version
    of the *brahmadaṇḍa*, which was to give the silent
    treatment ([DN
    16:6.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.4.1)).

[^338]: In [MN 56:19.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#19.2)
   *āvaṭa*/*anāvaṭa* is used in reference to
    Upāli "shutting his gate" against the Jains and opening
    it for the Buddhists. In [DN
    17:1.23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.23.2)
   *anāvaṭa* means "open to the public".

[^339]: Sanaṅkumāra ("Everyoung") became a Hindu deity
    closely associated with the worship of Krishna. He first appears in
    the seventh chapter of the Chāndogya
    Upaniṣad. There he teaches the learned
    Nārada what lies beyond the mere surface of words
    (*nāma*) by giving a progressive meditation that
    ultimately reveals the highest Self. Thus he is a perfect foil for
    Ambaṭṭha. The occasion he spoke this verse is recorded
    at [SN 6.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.11/en/sujato), and it is
    repeated several times in the suttas.

[^340]: To his credit, after that thorough humiliation,
    Ambaṭṭha is ready to learn.

[^341]: Reading *anuttarāya
    vijjācaraṇasampadāya* as locative, in agreement with
   *yattha* below.

[^342]: The Buddha emphasizes that his "knowledge and conduct" rejects
    the notion of birth that is so essential to Brahmanism.

[^343]: The Pali text abbreviates the gradual training in this sutta and
    those that follow. The reader is expected to understand it as in [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato). Note, however, that the
    suttas sometimes have small differences in their perspective that
    make reconstruction tricky.

[^344]: In later Theravada, *apāyamukha* refers to deeds
    that cause rebirth in lower realms. However this does not apply in
    the early texts; the acts described here are not evil. Rather, it
    means an "opening" (*mukha*) for "departure" (*apāya*).

[^345]: A common practice of pre-Buddhist hermits, who avoided the
    slightest harm to plants. Buddhist mendicants may also not harm
    plants, but they rely on alms and only eat fallen fruit in case of
    famine.

[^346]: The Buddha inverts Ambaṭṭha's earlier claim that
    the other three castes only succeed in serving brahmins ([DN
    3:1.14.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.14.7)).

[^347]: They are less strict than the previous ascetics, for they dig
    the soil and harm the plants.

[^348]: "Tradition" renders *sācariyaka*, "that which stems
    from one's own teacher".

[^349]: This practice is not elsewhere attested in early Pali.

[^350]: *Ugga* is a rare word whose root sense is "mighty", but here it
    must be a noun. Given that it is a military man who consults with
    the king, I translate as "warrior-chief". \| *Rājañña*
    is used occasionally in the suttas; it is an archaic synonym for
   *khattiya*.

[^351]: Taking this and the next as one sentence, despite the
    punctuation of the Mahāsaṅgīti text.

[^352]: The "hymns" (*mantā*) are the verses of the Rig
    Veda. The ten names here all correspond with Vedic authors according
    to the Brahmanical tradition (for details, see note on [DN
    13:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#13.1)). Note that
    in Sanskrit the names of the rishis are distinguished from the
    lineage holders, which take the patronymic. For example,
    Bharadvāja is the rishi, the Bhāradvājas
    are his descendants; Vasiṣṭha is the rishi, the
    Vāsiṣṭhas are his descendants. Pali texts do not make
    this distinction, but use the patronymic, although the two forms are
    not always readily distinguishable. \| "Seer" is *isi* (Sanskrit
   *ṛṣi*). It is of uncertain etymology, but was taken to
    mean that they had "seen" the Vedas (*mantradraṣṭa*) or
    directly "heard" them from Brahmā through divine
    inspiration, rather than "composing" them like ordinary authors.
    Here, however, the Buddha says they were "authors"
    (*kattāro*). The Buddha adopted *isi* in the sense
    "enlightened sage".

[^353]: *Veṭhakanatapassāhi* is otherwise unattested. At
    [MN 55:12.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn55/en/sujato#12.4)
   *veṭhaka* evidently means "collar". In the
    Lokuttaravāda Bhikṣuṇī Vinaya, the brazen
    nun Thullānandā gets out of the water and wraps herself
    in a *veṭhaka*, which here seems synonymous with
   *paṭṭaka*, a strip of cloth. It is allowable if used to
    tie a basket ([Lo Bi Pn 3](https://suttacentral.net/san-lo-bi-pn3)).
   *Nata* is "curve", *passa* is "side, flank". Walshe has "flounces
    and furbelows", Rhys Davids has "fringes and furbelows round their
    loins". These are prissy descriptions of what is evidently stripper
    gear.

[^354]: The Buddha calls back to earlier in the sutta, where
    Ambaṭṭha drove a mare-drawn chariot ([DN
    3:1.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.6.1)). \| The
    verbs here (*vitudenti vitacchenti*) are elsewhere applied to the
    pecking and slashing of vultures, crows, or hawks ([SN
    19.1:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn19.1/en/sujato#3.2), [MN
    54:16.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn54/en/sujato#16.2), etc.). The
    Buddha was disgusted with this maltreatment of the mares.

[^355]: Remembering that Pokkharasāti lived in a wealthy
    property that was a royal endowment. Just as today, excessive wealth
    breeds insecurity.

[^356]: The Buddha has been hard on Ambaṭṭha, but he is not
    unfair. He invites the same level of scrutiny for himself.

[^357]: This transition occurs nowhere else.

[^358]: Finally he remembers what his teacher Pokkharasāti
    told him in [DN
    3:1.5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.5.2): he will know
    the Buddha by his marks.

[^359]: This exceedingly strange "miracle" is also found at [MN
    91:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#7.1), [MN
    92:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn92/en/sujato#14.1), and [Snp
    3.7:11.5](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.7/en/sujato#11.5).

[^360]: The diminutive ending for *paṇḍitaka* is the same
    as in *samaṇaka*, which Ambaṭṭha used of
    the Buddha. \| For *re* ("bloody"), compare *cara pi re* at [Bu Pc
    70:1.35](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc70/en/sujato#1.35)
    and *he je kāḷī* at [MN
    21:9.13](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#9.13). Hard as the
    Buddha was on Ambaṭṭha, his own teacher was harder.

[^361]: Pokkharasāti shows his astuteness, for in many
    other dialogues the Buddha engaged with brahmins perfectly politely,
    as he does in the next sutta ([DN
    4](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato)).

[^362]: Illustrating the lack of restraint of even a senior brahmin
    teacher.

[^363]: Given Pokkharasāti's mood, this was probably a
    diplomatic move.

[^364]: *Khādanīya* and *bhojanīya* are food
    categories commonly mentioned in Pali. Etymologically they stem from
    "hard and soft". *Bhojanīya* is defined in [Bu Pc
    37:2.1.10](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc37/en/sujato#2.1.10)
    as grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat, thus being foods
    that are typically eaten cooked and "mooshed up" in with the fingers
    in the bowl. *Khādanīya* is not so readily defined,
    being essentially everything not included in other categories. But
    it would have included such "crunchy" things as fruit and
    vegetables, which may be eaten uncooked.

[^365]: Pokkharasāti makes sure he hears both sides of the
    story.

[^366]: So far has Ambaṭṭha fallen from the learned sage we
    were introduced to at the start of the sutta.

[^367]: The Buddha bears no ill will. *Sukhī hotu* is one
    of the most recognizable Pali phrases, but in early texts it is
    spoken only a few times: by the Buddha at [DN
    21:1.8.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.8.8) and [Snp
    5.1:54.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.1/en/sujato#54.1); by
    Punabbasu's Mother at [SN
    10.7:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.7/en/sujato#10.1); and by
    various women at [Bu Ss
    5:1.4.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss5/en/sujato#1.4.8).

[^368]: "Robed up" because inside the monastery, monks would normally
    wear just a lower robe, and would don the upper and (sometimes)
    outer robes when visiting a layperson's home.

[^369]: While all these teachings feature commonly in the suttas, there
    is no text that depicts this framework in detail.

[^370]: This is the briefest expression of the four noble truths.

[^371]: This indicates that he became a stream-enterer
    (*sotāpanna*), the first of four stages of Awakening.
    Such details of personal attainment are typically found in the
    narrative rather than the teaching attributed to the Buddha, and
    hence were added by redactors at some point. They vary considerably
    in different versions. In this case, the parallel at DA 20 says that
    he became a stream-enterer and later a non-returner. T 20 said that
    he understood the teaching and went for refuge, and agrees that he
    became a non-returner before his death.

[^372]: This is the insight into universal impermanence and dependent
    origination.

[^373]: When wandering for alms, mendicants would often roam randomly
    through the village (*sapadānacārī*). However if an
    invitation such as this were issued, the mendicant may visit that
    place for a meal. It was considered a special ascetic practice to
    refuse such invitations. The same invitation was issued by Lohicca
    to Mahākaccāna at [SN
    35.132:14.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.132/en/sujato#14.7).

[^374]: *Māṇavikā* is also mentioned at [MN
    56:27.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#27.1) and [Ud
    2.6:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/ud2.6/en/sujato#1.3) of a young
    married woman; and at [AN
    5.192:8.5](https://suttacentral.net/an5.192/en/sujato#8.5) of a baby
    being born. Thus it does not seem that it meant "female student of
    the Vedas".

[^375]: *Kalyāṇaṁ vuccati* is a politely ambiguous phrase.
    It is spoken twice elsewhere in the Pali, and both times the
    mendicant who said it immediately departed and never returned ([SN
    41.3:7.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.3/en/sujato#7.13), [SN
    41.4:6.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.4/en/sujato#6.7)).

[^376]: This sutta shows how the conversion of Pokkharasāti
    in [DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato) affected the
    brahmins as far away as Campā.

[^377]: Campā is modern Champapuri near Bhagalpur in Bihar
    state, not far from West Bengal. It is near the eastern-most reach
    of the Buddha's journeys. Campā was the capital of
    Aṅga, one of the sixteen "great nations"
    (*mahājanapadā*). It was a flourishing trade center at
    which Northern Black Polished Ware has been found, and became a
    sacred city for the Jains.

[^378]: *Gaggarā*, an onomatopoeic reduplication
    ("gargle"), is the name of a number of rivers and whirlpools in
    Sanskrit (cp. the modern Ghaggar River in north-west India).

[^379]: Here we see how the endowment of *brahmadeyya* helped the king
    of Magadha establish his influence over the Aṅgas.

[^380]: "Householders" (*gahapati*) is literal; it means land owners.
    Thus the "brahmins and householders" (not "brahmin householders")
    were the wealthy class.

[^381]: Both the repetition below and the parallel at [MN
    95:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#8.3) include the
    phrase "it's appropriate that he comes to see you". It may have been
    omitted here by mistake.

[^382]: *Jātivāda* is sometimes translated as "doctrine of
    birth", but the context here shows this cannot be the case. It
    refers to the genealogical records of the family lineage.

[^383]: For Mahāsaṅgīti *vacchasī* read
   *vaccasī* (Sanskrit *varcasin*), "possessing splendor".

[^384]: Notice that the royal endowment was not just for a luxury
    residence, it was the site of a major international college. Kings
    invested in education.

[^385]: Later tradition says that the young Siddhattha sneaked out of
    his home to avoid creating such a scene, but the early texts say he
    left despite his parents' weeping.

[^386]: In contrast with some of the other ascetics in [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato).

[^387]: This description is applied to the Buddha at [DN
    5:7.24](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#7.24), and to the
    corrupt but superficially charming monks Assaji and Punabbasuka at
    [Bu Ss
    13:1.3.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss13/en/sujato#1.3.4).

[^388]: This would be the assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins,
    householders, and ascetics ([AN
    5.213:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an5.213/en/sujato#3.1)), rather
    than the Buddha's four assemblies of monks, nuns, laymen, and
    laywomen ([AN 4.129](https://suttacentral.net/an4.129/en/sujato)).

[^389]: *Titthakara*, literally "ford-maker", is a term restricted to
    those such as the Buddha who founded a religion, or
    Mahāvīra who was a major reformer on the same level as
    a founder.

[^390]: Bimbisāra's refuge is at [Kd
    1:22.11.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#22.11.4).

[^391]: Pasenadi's refuge is at [SN
    3.1:14.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.1/en/sujato#14.5).

[^392]: This sutta must have been before the events of [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), but after those of [DN
    3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato).

[^393]: "Knapsack" is *puṭosa*, where *puṭa*
    is "bag" and *osa* is "food" (Sanskrit *avasa*). The compound is a
    dative-dependent *tappurisa* with reversal of the usual order,
    yielding the sense "bag for food".

[^394]: Even before he meets him, Soṇadaṇḍa has extensive
    knowledge of the Buddha and faith in him. It's also notable how
    Soṇadaṇḍa gives Pokkharasāti a special
    status. Perhaps Pokkharasāti told
    Soṇadaṇḍa of the encounter with Ambaṭṭha
    in [DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato), which would
    explain his hesitation. \| Note the use of the term *yoniso* here,
    which I render "rational". The basic meaning of the term is "womb,
    source", and it is used to mean "with reason", which here has the
    sense "pertinent, relevant".

[^395]: For all his previous avowal of faith, Soṇadaṇḍa is
    merely polite, not reverential. This foreshadows the ending.

[^396]: The Buddha goes out of his way to make him comfortable.
    Soṇadaṇḍa is nervous and overly eager to please, but he
    is not contemptuous and grinding a personal ax like
    Ambaṭṭha.

[^397]: *Suja* (Sanskrit *sruc*) was a large wooden ladle for pouring
    ghee on to the sacred flame.

[^398]: The Buddha uses "Socratic method". He has the other person
    articulate a view, then leads them to refine their view, leading to
    a clearer vision of the truth.

[^399]: When the Buddha convinces Soṇadaṇḍa, he does not
    crow over it or take pleasure in his discomfort, but praises his
    wisdom and affirms his conclusions.

[^400]: The Buddha has taken pains to establish common ground, but
    Soṇadaṇḍa's description of wisdom is lacking, so the
    Buddha prompts a deeper inquiry.

[^401]: Normally, the Buddha frames his teaching as ethics, meditation,
    and wisdom, but here he adapts to Soṇadaṇḍa's framing
    and places meditation under wisdom.

[^402]: Soṇadaṇḍa's attachment to his reputation betrays
    his lack of inner confidence and stands in contrast with
    Pokkharasāti. Perhaps it may also be read as a regional
    characteristic, since Buddhism was less well established in the
    Aṅga region than in central Magadha.

[^403]: When asked about sacrifice, the Buddha tells a story of how a
    king was persuaded to forgo cruelty and institute a constructive
    social policy of welfare instead.

[^404]: Khāṇumata is only mentioned here. It means
    "stumpy", perhaps indicating that it was, or had recently been, a
    rough out-of-the-way place.

[^405]: The commentary says this was similar to the
    Ambalaṭṭhikā of [DN
    1:1.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.2.1).

[^406]: Like the town Khāṇumata, the brahmin
    Kūṭadanta appears only here. His name means "pointy
    teeth", but there is no evidence that he was a vampire.

[^407]: At [Snp
    2.7:26.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato#26.1), the
    sacrifice of cows in particular was said to be the nadir of decline
    for brahmins. When similar sacrifices are described elsewhere in the
    canon, the number is five hundred rather than seven hundred ([SN
    3.9:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.9/en/sujato#1.2), [AN
    7.47:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an7.47/en/sujato#1.2)).

[^408]: News of the Buddha had spread in Brahmanical circles. In [DN
    3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato) we saw the Buddha use his
    rhetorical technique of adapting his teaching to reframe Brahmanical
    doctrines in order to establish a common ground. Here we see the
    downside to such techniques, as the details of the reframing have
    been lost.

[^409]: No such sacrifice has been identified in Brahmanical texts.

[^410]: Kūṭadanta's proposal that the Buddha advise him on
    the sacrifice of 700 animals is outrageous. Nonetheless, the Buddha
    responds politely since Kūṭadanta is being polite.
    While it is tempting to see the sacrifice of animals by supposedly
    virtuous priests as sheer hypocrisy, the fact of sacrifice remains
    one of the most widespread and mysterious of human religious
    practices. In an empathetic work that addresses this squarely,
    Roberto Calasso's *Ardor* sees the vast complex of Vedic ritual and
    theory as making plain the fact of killing so that the guilt may be
    contained, in contrast with our modern culture of killing on an
    industrial scale while hiding it out of sight.

[^411]: Mahāvijita means "Great Dominion". He seems to be
    only known from this story. The idiom *bhūtapubbaṁ*
    (literally "so it was in the past") introduces legendary narratives
    of usually dubious historicity, like the English idiom "once upon a
    time".

[^412]: In the Pali, meaningful thoughts often occur to people when
    withdrawn in seclusion. This doesn't necessary mean they were in
    formal meditation.

[^413]: The great sacrifices, especially the horse sacrifice, ensured
    royal authority. Their very scale and wastefulness showed off the
    wealth of the king.

[^414]: "High priest" is *purohita*. He was a family chaplain advising
    and consecrating the royal family. The closeness of the relationship
    is shown by the fact that the royal family would take the lineage
    name of the *purohita*.

[^415]: Then, as today, government policy was driven by the perception
    of rising crime rate. This whole passage is one of the Buddha's most
    important statements on public policy. It is expressed through
    storytelling, giving a good example of how myths were invoked---and
    subverted---as rationales for current policy.

[^416]: "Taxes" is *bali*. He would have had to press his people for the
    extra funds to hold the sacrifice.

[^417]: "Plague of savages" (*dassukhīla*) is the only
    occurrence of Sanskrit *dasyu* in early Pali. The *dasyu* were
    inveterate foes of the Aryans in the Vedic period. Bereft of
    civilizing rites, scriptures, and observances, they were no children
    of Manu (Rig Veda 10.22.8). Their wiles (*māyā*) made
    them a potent threat (Rig Veda 4.16.9, 8.14.14, 10.73.5). Indra was
    invoked to ensure their destruction (Rig Veda *passim*; Atharva Veda
    2.14.5, 4.32.3, 20.21.4, 20.37.5, 20.42.2). Legend has it that Agni
    and Soma first supported the *dasyu* before being won over by Indra
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 1.6.3.13; see also 6.4.2.4). By the
    time of the Buddha the *dasyu* have vanished except as a legendary
    foe of the past. Where the Brahmanical texts advocate the pitiless
    destruction of the *dasyu*, the brahmin high priest in the Buddhist
    text advocates an inclusive policy of social welfare.

[^418]: The priest knows that the king will respond better to a
    pragmatic argument than a moral one.

[^419]: Effective social policy requires a forward-thinking plan, not
    just reacting to grievances.

[^420]: The king should spend his own resources to support his citizens
    in the various occupations.

[^421]: Here the priest identifies a fundamental cause of social unrest
    and disorder.

[^422]: The king spends out of pocket, but the economy flourishes, so
    tax revenues increase even though he has not raised taxes. This is
    the essence of Keynesian economic theory.

[^423]: *Khema* means a place of safety and sanctuary, where both humans
    and animals have no fear.

[^424]: A good leader listens to advice.

[^425]: Here the phrase "of both town and country" qualifies each group.
    At [AN 4.70:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.70/en/sujato#1.3),
    however, "brahmins and householders" and "people of town and
    country" are separate groups of people. Elsewhere the context does
    not always decide between these two possibilities. Generally the
    idiom aims at inclusivity, as opposed to here where the king is
    consulting the rich and powerful, so I treat them as two separate
    groups, thus including the common folk.

[^426]: "Consenting factions" is *anumatipakkhā*. The king
    governs with the consent of his people, although only the landowning
    classes are considered.

[^427]: Royal authority is not based just on birth, conquest, ritual, or
    power, but on quality of character.

[^428]: Read *sahati* ("prevails") over the several variants.

[^429]: Showing the importance of comprehension over blind adherence to
    tradition.

[^430]: Meditators focus on the present, but that does not mean they
    cannot think about the past or future; it just means they are not
    trapped in useless thoughts.

[^431]: These are four of the five qualities that Soṇadaṇḍa
    identifies as the qualities of a brahmin at [DN
    4:13.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#13.2). Missing is
    appearance, which is the first factor that Soṇadaṇḍa
    admits is unnecessary.

[^432]: Compare the three factors of a donor's mind-state at [AN
    6.37:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/an6.37/en/sujato#2.4).

[^433]: What a recipient does with a gift is beyond the donor's control.

[^434]: PTS edition acknowledges *sajjata* only as a variant reading,
    but it is in the commentary, so should be accepted in the text. It
    is from √*sajj* (relinquish).

[^435]: Another lesson in leadership: the importance of communication.

[^436]: Due to abbreviation, the text only mentions householders here,
    but clearly all are intended.

[^437]: A leader gets results through inspiration, not fear.

[^438]: These were regarded as valuable yet harmless products.

[^439]: The king's generosity and sincerity brings out the best in the
    others.

[^440]: Here ends the Buddha's legendary account of the past.

[^441]: The other brahmins are satisfied, but Kūṭadanta
    senses there is more to it.

[^442]: "So I have heard" (*evaṁ me sutaṁ*) is
    the standard opening for Buddhist suttas. This tag was used to
    indicate that the speaker was not present at the events, but "heard"
    about them. This is in contrast with the phrase "I heard and learned
    this in the presence" (*sammukhā sutaṁ,
    sammukhā paṭiggahitaṁ*), which is used
    when reporting a teaching heard directly from the Buddha, eg. [SN
    55.52:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.52/en/sujato#5.1), [SN
    22.90:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.90/en/sujato#9.1), [MN
    47:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn47/en/sujato#10.7), etc.

[^443]: This qualifies the story of Mahāvijita as an early
    canonical Jātaka. There are a small number of such
    stories in the early suttas, only some of which overlap with the
    later Jātaka collections, the story of
    Mahāvijita not being among them.

[^444]: Kūṭadanta is hoping for a better return on his
    investment. Throughout the suttas, we find a strain of what might be
    called "spiritual economics".

[^445]: Mentioned in a similar context at [AN
    4.40:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.40/en/sujato#2.2).

[^446]: This contradicts the description given above.

[^447]: This means that the dwelling could be used by any
    Saṅgha member, as opposed to being given to a
    particular monastic or group. The gift of a dwelling is regarded as
    the best kind of offering to the Saṅgha.

[^448]: Thus far the Buddha has described the regular practice of a
    Buddhist lay person.

[^449]: The entire path may be described as a "sacrifice".

[^450]: Releasing animals remains a Buddhist practice today.

[^451]: Lying some 60 kilometers north of Pāṭaliputra
    (Patna), Vesālī was the largest city in the Vajji
    Federation, a republican league in the region north of the Ganges.

[^452]: In the earlier suttas of this chapter, we have seen how news of
    the Buddha spread, evidently following Pokkharasāti's
    conversion. Here we see an example of the kind of meeting at which
    such news would be discussed. \| The phrase "brahmin emissaries"
    (*brāhmaṇadūtā*) does not seem to occur elsewhere and
    is not explained in the commentary. Perhaps they were emissaries of
    the kings, meeting in a neutral location. Or perhaps they were
    emissaries of their respective communities of brahmins.

[^453]: This monastery features prominently as the Buddha's usual place
    of residence near Vesālī.

[^454]: At some times the Buddha would go on retreat and ask that no-one
    visit him except to bring food; this sometimes happened at the Great
    Wood ([SN 54.9:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn54.9/en/sujato#2.1)).
    He also had the habit of withdrawing into the wood itself for
    meditation ([AN
    5.58:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.58/en/sujato#1.3)). At this
    time, however, he was simply staying in a nearby hut, so it seems
    Nāgita is being over-zealous.

[^455]: Oṭṭhaddha mean "hare-lip" and is evidently a
    nickname or epithet. Throughout, the Buddha refers to him by his
    personal name, Mahāli. And it is under that name we
    meet him again in [SN
    11.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.13/en/sujato) and [SN
    22.60](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.60/en/sujato). \| The
    Licchavis, whose name is derived from "bear", dominated the Vajji
    Federation. Note that the Mahāsaṅgīti edition here
    spells the masculine singular as *licchavī*, whereas
    normally it is *licchavi*.

[^456]: This Sīha is unknown elsewhere.

[^457]: Kassapa is Nāgita's clan name; either he was a
    brahmin or a *khattiya* whose family chaplain (*purohita*) was a
    Kassapa.

[^458]: In trying to protect the Buddha, Nāgita was
    inflexible and lacking compassion. When given good advice by
    Sīha, he responded gracelessly, fobbing off
    responsibility to a junior. No wonder he was replaced by Ānanda.

[^459]: This is still a common place for forest monks to receive guests.

[^460]: This is the last we hear of these emissaries.

[^461]: Sunakkhatta features in several suttas, through which his
    journey may be traced. In [MN
    105](https://suttacentral.net/mn105/en/sujato) he meets the Buddha
    and gains faith; here in [DN
    6](https://suttacentral.net/dn6/en/sujato) he is becoming
    dissatisfied; in [DN 24](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato) he
    rejects the Buddha; and in [MN
    12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato) he attacks the Buddha
    after disrobing.

[^462]: This refers to "clairvoyance" and "clairaudience", sometimes
    translated as the "divine eye" and "divine ear". Despite being
    included in the Gradual Training, they are not a goal of Buddhist
    practice. Rather, they are unnecessary but potentially useful, as
    they reveal dimensions of being inaccessible to ordinary
    consciousness. Sunakkhatta, however, was evidently just interested
    in having pleasant supersensory experiences.

[^463]: This must have wounded his pride.

[^464]: This description of meditation is unique in the Pali canon. The
    Buddha answers Mahāli's question directly, even though
    the premise betrays Sunakkhatta's limited understanding. When a
    questioner is sincere, answering directly shows respect and builds
    trust.

[^465]: Having directly answered the original question, the Buddha
    reframed the issue on request.

[^466]: This is the first description of the four stages of awakening
    which are featured throughout the Pali canon. The three fetters are
    identity view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and
    observances ([MN
    2:11.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn2/en/sujato#11.3)).

[^467]: The five lower fetters are the three mentioned above, plus
    sensual desire and ill will ([AN
    10.13:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an10.13/en/sujato#1.5)). This is
    the non-returner, who spends their last life in an exalted
    Brahmā realm. \| A "spontaneous" rebirth is one that
    occurs without gestation in the womb, like most *devas*, or for that
    matter, Boltzmann brains.

[^468]: This is the arahant, the "worthy" or "perfected" one. Elsewhere
    it is said they abandon the five higher fetters: desire for rebirth
    in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless
    realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance ([AN
    10.13:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an10.13/en/sujato#2.2)).

[^469]: This is the most fundamental of the Buddha's teachings on the
    path, declared in his first sermon ([SN
    56.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato)). It reappears in
    [DN 8:13.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#13.5), [DN
    19:61.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#61.7), and [DN
    22:21.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#21.2).

[^470]: The eight factors map roughly on to the Gradual Training thus:
    hearing the Dhamma gives rise to right view; the choice to renounce
    is right thought; ethics includes right speech, action, and
    livelihood; undertaking seclusion and sense restraint is right
    effort; developing meditation is right mindfulness; and gaining the
    four *jhānas* is right immersion. Realization of the
    Dhamma completes the circle by deepening conceptual right view to
    liberating insight. Sometimes this is expressed by adding two
    further factors, right knowledge and right liberation.

[^471]: The Buddha retells the events recorded in the next sutta, [DN
    7](https://suttacentral.net/dn7/en/sujato).

[^472]: Muṇḍiya means "shaven one"; his name is spelled
    Mandissa in some manuscripts. He appears only in this passage.
    Jāliya returns in [DN
    24:2.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#2.4.1), which
    recounts the farcical events following Sunakkhatta's disrobal. There
    he takes the Buddha's part against the delusional
    Pāṭikaputta favored by Sunakkhatta.

[^473]: The term "soul" (*jīva*) was favored by the
   *samaṇas*, as opposed to the "self"
    (*attā*) of the brahmins. Both are rejected by the
    Buddha as forms of "metaphysical" self: they postulate the absolute,
    eternal existence of entities that cannot be established
    empirically. The repeated demonstrative pronouns (*taṁ
    jīvaṁ taṁ sarīraṁ*) assert an
    emphatic identity.

[^474]: They evidently believed that the experience of
    jhāna would grant insight into this dilemma. But it is
    a loaded question: it assumes that the soul is real and that what
    needs determining is its relation to the body.

[^475]: Until this point, none of the experiences described are
    fundamentally incompatible with the notion of an eternal
    metaphysical self. Buddhists believe that non-Buddhists, before and
    after the Buddha, are quite capable of realizing such states.
    However, they would tend to interpret them in line with their
    previous beliefs, thus reinforcing their theories of self. Faced
    with the end of all rebirth, however, no theory of eternal self can
    stand.

[^476]: This sutta depicts the events that were subsequently related by
    the Buddha in the previous sutta, [DN
    6](https://suttacentral.net/dn6/en/sujato).

[^477]: Ujuññā was a Kosalan town at which King Pasenadi
    visited the Buddha in [MN
    90](https://suttacentral.net/mn90/en/sujato). \| "Deer parks" were
    nature reservations where the animals were safe from hunters.

[^478]: Naked ascetics are still found in India today. Some Jains went
    naked, but if he were a Jain he would have been introduced as such.
    Kassapa is an ancient clan name of the brahmins, and we meet four
    naked ascetics named Kassapa in the canon (here, [SN
    12.17](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.17/en/sujato), [SN
    41.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.9/en/sujato), and [MN
    124](https://suttacentral.net/mn124/en/sujato)). They cannot be the
    same person, for at the end of each account it is said they went
    forth and attained arahantship.

[^479]: In his first sermon, the Buddha rejected extremes of
    self-mortification. There the term was *attakilamatha*
    ("self-mortification"), whereas here it is *tapas* ("heat, burning,
    fervor"). These refer to the same practices, but *tapas* points to
    the fervent ardor of the practitioner, generating an inner heat that
    "burns off" the corrupting traces of *kamma* and defilements. This
    topic is also discussed in [AN
    10.94](https://suttacentral.net/an10.94/en/sujato).

[^480]: While the self-mortification itself may be useless, the person
    who practices it may have other good qualities. The Buddha is
    cautioning against rash judgement.

[^481]: Again we see the Buddha's preferred method of establishing
    common ground first, then building an argument from there.

[^482]: Rather than logical hair-splitting, the Buddha recommends
    looking at a person's conduct.

[^483]: Here *-va* has an exclusive sense (= *eva*). Compare [Dhp
    274](https://suttacentral.net/dhp274/en/sujato): *eseva maggo
    natthañño* ("This is the path, there is no other").

[^484]: Compare [DN
    16:5.27.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.27.1).

[^485]: What follows is a description of ascetic practices undertaken by
    the Jains and similar groups. \| The phrase "course of fervent
    mortification" (*tapopakkama*) is unique to this sutta. *Pakkama*
    means "stepping out".

[^486]: Buddhist mendicants may not receive food in their hands, nor
    lick them while eating. Followers of the practices listed here would
    have walked steadily and randomly for alms, accepting only what was
    given at the time.

[^487]: Keeping sheep (*eḷaka*, for slaughter) goes against
    the Jain principle of non-violence, as does keeping weapons
    (*daṇḍa*). \| A *musala* often means "pestle", but it
    can also be a "shovel"; at [MN
    81:18.12](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato#18.12) it is
    regarded as a virtue to not use one to dig the soil (which is
    regarded as being alive in Jainism). \| *Thusodaka* is an alcoholic
    porridge fermented from grain-husks, mentioned alongside
   *sovīraka* in the Pali commentaries and
    Carakasaṁhitā 27g.191.

[^488]: It is not easy to meaningfully distinguish the various kinds of
    grain.

[^489]: All are extremely uncomfortable. Christian ascetics wore a "hair
    shirt" in order to "mortify the flesh" .

[^490]: Jain ascetics tear out their hair at ordination, rather than
    shaving.

[^491]: Remaining in one posture for months or years at a time is one of
    the most difficult practices.

[^492]: Strict Jain ascetics did not bathe.

[^493]: At [Kd
    6:14.6.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd6/en/sujato#14.6.3) the
    four "great unnaturals" (or "filthy edibles",
   *mahāvikaṭa*) are said to be feces, urine, ash, and
    clay. At [MN 12:49.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#49.3)
    the Buddha said he ate the "unnatural things" of feces and urine
    when undertaking ascetic practices.

[^494]: This seems out of place here. It was a Brahmanical practice ([SN
    7.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn7.21/en/sujato)), as the Jains
    refused to bathe at all. Indeed, bathing three times a day in the
    Indian climate would, for most of the year, be quite pleasant.

[^495]: The term "accomplishment in mind" (*cittasampadā*)
    is equivalent to "accomplishment in immersion"
    (*samādhisampadā*). More generally, when *citta* is
    used in the context of meditation, it is normally a synonym of
   *samādhi*.

[^496]: *Mettā* is universal love and good will free from
    attachment. As well as being a foundation for good character and
    healthy emotional development, it serves to lead the mind into deep
    meditation of *jhāna*.

[^497]: The Buddha was criticized for going soft after abandoning
    austere practices, but here he flips the script, arguing that it is
    inner transformation that is really hard, not outer shows of
    mortification.

[^498]: Note that the heading for this section in the
    Mahāsaṅgīti edition uses *samādhi* rather
    than *citta*. Headings were added by later editors, and are not part
    of the original text.

[^499]: This is the ethical practices as described in the Gradual
    Training.

[^500]: "Mortification in disgust of sin" renders
   *tapojigucchā*; *tapo* is "fervent mortification" and
   *jigucchā* is "loathing, disgust". It captures the
    severity with which practitioners regarded the "evil" or "sin" with
    which they were infected, like a quasi-physical stain on the soul,
    and the burning flame of white-hot pain required to cauterize their
    spiritual wounds.

[^501]: The Buddha repurposes the concept of "disgust of sin", which
    here stands in the place of meditation (*samādhi*).

[^502]: A "lion's roar" is an unapologetic proclamation of spiritual
    supremacy.

[^503]: The Buddha is referring to the events of the Udumbarikasutta
    ([DN 25](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato)). There Nigrodha
    is referred to as a "wanderer" (*paribbājaka*) who
    according to the commentary was clothed. The term
   *tapabrahmacārī* here is unique and is not explained in
    the commentary. I think it means he was a celibate student of a
    Brahmanical teacher.

[^504]: This probation is laid down in the Vinaya at [Kd
    1:38.1.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#38.1.5). The
    candidate shaves, dons the robes, takes refuge, and asks for
    probation. They must show good conduct and restraint, diligence in
    duties, and enthusiasm for the Buddha's teachings and practice.

[^505]: In addition to individual exceptions, there are general
    exceptions for dreadlocked ascetics, since they believe in kamma,
    and for the Buddha's relatives.

[^506]: Poṭṭhapāda appears only here; he was named for a
    month of the lunar calendar (August/September). \|
    Mallikā was the chief queen of Pasenadi, and her hall
    is mentioned in a similar context at [MN
    78:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn78/en/sujato#1.3). The commentary
    explains that the brahmins, Jains, and others would assemble there
    to "debate their beliefs" (*samayaṁ pavadanti*).
    Evidently the monastery grounds had accommodation for many ascetics
    of different beliefs, but only "one hall" where they would gather
    for debate. We hear many times of such debates, but here we catch a
    glimpse of a place that was set up to facilitate them. For
   *-ācīra*, read in the sense of "boundary, hedge"
    (commentary: *timbarūrukkhapantiyā
    parikkhittattā*; cf. Sanskrit *prācīra*,
    "enclosure, hedge, fence, wall").

[^507]: According to the commentary, when he approached the vicinity of
    the city gate, he decided to check the position of the sun and
    noticed that it was too early to enter. The commentary and
    sub-commentary explain that it only sounds like the Buddha was in
    doubt, for Buddhas deliberate before deciding on a course of action.

[^508]: This can be understood as answering the criticism voiced in [DN
    8:22.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#22.2), that the
    Buddha was afraid to speak in an assembly.

[^509]: In contrast with the silence of the Buddha's community at [DN
    2:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#10.7).

[^510]: The Buddha encourages quiet for the sake of mental development;
    Poṭṭhapāda does it for the sake of reputation.

[^511]: Poṭṭhapāda's address is almost overly deferential.

[^512]: Always polite, the Buddha begins by showing an interest in them.

[^513]: *Abhisaññā* does not appear elsewhere. Here the
    prefix *abhi-* means not "higher", but rather "about, concerning".
    Compare *abhidhamma* at [MN
    32:8.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn32/en/sujato#8.6): *dve
    bhikkhū abhidhammakathaṁ kathenti* ("two
    mendicants engage in discussion about the teaching"); also
   *abhivinaya* at [AN
    3.140:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/an3.140/en/sujato#4.4). The
    commentary here says *abhi-* is a mere particle, so it need not be
    translated.

[^514]: This discussion appears to have been directly sparked by the
    difficult passage in Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 2.4.12 and 4.5.13. The sage
    Yājñavalkya, teaching his wife Maitreyī,
    says that the true Self is a sheer mass of "consciousness"
    (*vijñāna*, Pali *viññāṇa*), which is
    "great, endless, infinite reality". After realizing this, he says,
    there is no "perception" (*saṁjñā*, Pali
   *saññā*), a statement that bewilders even the wise
    Maitreyī. He explains that only in an apparent state of
    duality (*dvaitamiva*) do the separate functions of sense
    consciousness operate. When all is realized as the Self, how, he
    asks, can one know that owing to which all this is known? He is
    implicitly distinguishing between *viññāna* as
    "infinite" (= *vi-*) knowing and *saññā* as
    "constrained" (*saṁ-*) knowing.
    Yājñavalkya says the separate Self emerges with these
    elements and vanishes with them (*etebhyo bhūtebhyaḥ
    samutthāya tānyevānu
    vinaśyati*), but he does not explain how or why this
    happens, which is the question the theorists here attempt to
    address.

[^515]: Here perception is not identified with the "person" (*purisa*),
    but rather belongs to them (cf. *etaṁ mama*, "this is
    mine"). In the discussion to follow, the Buddha only directly
    addresses this theory, while the remainder are included by
    inference.

[^516]: This idiom is also at [SN
    47.19:1.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.19/en/sujato#1.10).

[^517]: The self is defined as perception (*eso me attā*),
    one of the five aggregates. Compare the various theories of the self
    and perception at [DN
    1:2.38.0](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.0).

[^518]: Implying that at such times a person lacks a "self". This is
    perhaps related to Yājñavalkya's: "That man, when born,
    acquiring a body, is connected with ills (the bodily organs); and
    when he dies, departing, he discards those ills"
    (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.8).

[^519]: The commentary says these were devotees of
   *āthabbaṇa*, i.e the practices preserved in the
    Atharvaveda. This "fourth Veda" is mentioned only once by name in
    the early Pali ([Snp
    4.14:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.14/en/sujato#13.1)), where,
    as here, it is associated with the performance of magic and the
    casting of spells. The commentary fairly drips with contempt:
    "Allegedly, the Āthabbaṇa practitioners cast a spell,
    showing a creature's head as if cut off, or their hand as if cut
    off, or as if dead. Then they show them back to normal; imagining
    so, they say, 'From cessation they have arisen.'"

[^520]: See [DN 29:16.20](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#16.20)
    for *upakaḍḍhati* and *apakaḍḍhati* in
    this sense.

[^521]: *Pakataññū* is not elsewhere attested in the
    suttas, but it is found in the Vinaya, for example at [Bu Pc
    72:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc72/en/sujato#1.8)).

[^522]: Here the Buddha argues that, since it is possible to change the
    nature of one's own mind through practice, such changes cannot be
    random.

[^523]: It is is unusual if not unique to add "said the Buddha"
    (*bhagavā avoca*) in such a context. Normally, once a
    speaker starts, the text does not insert extra tags identifying the
    speaker without a reason, such as an interruption for a question.

[^524]: Sinhalese manuscripts, followed by PTS, include the paragraphs
    on the metaphor of the king's security ([DN
    2:63.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#63.1)) and on
    guarding the sense doors here.

[^525]: Progress through the *jhānas* is explained in terms
    of the refining of perceptions.

[^526]: "Subtle and true" is *sukhumasacca*, a term that appears only
    here.

[^527]: We have encountered the "formless attainments"
    (*arūpasamāpatti*) before, where they formed a refined
    basis for attachment to self ([DN
    1:3.13.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#3.13.4)). Here they
    appear as part of the gradual refinement of consciousness through
    the cessation of increasingly subtle perceptions.

[^528]: This is the vision of light that later came to be called a
    "sign" (*nimitta*). In the first four *jhānas* this
    persists as a "subtle" (*sukhuma*) reflection or echo of the
    "substantial" (*olārika*) material basis of meditation,
    such as the breath or the parts of the body. Even though it is a
    purely mental phenomenon, it is still "form" (*rūpa*)
    since it has physical properties like light or extension.

[^529]: The "light" (*obhāsa*) of *jhāna*
    grows from "limited" (*paritta*) to "limitless"
    (*appamāṇa*, [MN
    128:29.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn128/en/sujato#29.1)). Then the
    perception of even this limitless light vanishes, leaving only
    infinite space.

[^530]: Perception of infinite space fades away leaving only the
    infinite consciousness that is aware.

[^531]: The meditator is no longer even aware of infinite consciousness,
    but of the even vaster nothingness.

[^532]: The last of the four formless attainments is the dimension of
    neither perception nor non-perception. Since this, by definition,
    lies beyond the scope of perception, it is not included here.

[^533]: For *sakasaññī* ("takes charge of their own
    perception"), see [Bu Pj
    2:6.2.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj2/en/sujato#6.2.2).
    One relevant factor in determining whether an object has been stolen
    is if the accused "perceives it as their own". Here it means that
    the meditator understands that they can evolve their own perceptions
    through meditation.

[^534]: "Intend and choose" is *ceteyyaṁ
    abhisaṅkhareyyaṁ* (1st singular optative). These
    synonyms are used in the sense of a subtle sense of will or
    intentionality that underlies such attainments ([MN
    52:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn52/en/sujato#14.3)) and which
    must be let go lest they generate rebirth ([MN
    140:22.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#22.10)).

[^535]: Compare with "progressive cessation" ([AN
    9.31](https://suttacentral.net/an9.31/en/sujato)), "progressive
    tranquilizing of conditions" ([SN
    36.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.15/en/sujato)), "progressive
    meditations" ([AN 9.32](https://suttacentral.net/an9.32/en/sujato)),
    etc. \| "Awareness" is *sampajāna*, which we have
    encountered previously as "situational awareness" in daily
    activities, or as the "awareness" in the third *jhāna*.
    Here it refers to a reflective capacity to understand the nature of
    deep meditation in terms of causality. The term was adopted by
    Patañjalī, who defined
   *saṁprajñātasamādhi* in a way that is clearly drawn
    from the Buddhist definition of *jhāna*. It is attained
    with *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *ānanda*
    ("bliss"), and *āsmitā*. According to the commentary,
    this last term is "experience of the one self",
   *ekātmikā saṁvid*) and so is probably
    adapted from the Buddhist factor of *ekaggatā*.
    (Yogasūtra 1.17).

[^536]: Taking the kernel of Yājñavalkya's theory of the
    cessation of limited perception, the Buddha has expanded it in
    psychological and practical detail, while leaving out the
    metaphysical assumption of the Self.

[^537]: Poṭṭhapāda shows the Buddha that he has been paying
    attention. Notice how it is culturally assumed that it is possible
    to retain and repeat the exact content of the teaching.

[^538]: The meaning of this is not clear to me. It might mean that
    insight can be developed based on any of the stages of meditation,
    so for that person their peak of perception is different to
    another's. The commentary says that it refers to different
    meditation subjects, or simply to different occasions of meditation.

[^539]: Poṭṭhapāda's distinction between "perception"
    (*saññā*) and "knowledge" (*ñāṇa*) echoes
    Yājñavalkya's distinction between "perception"
    (*saṁjā*) and "consciousness" (*vijñāna*,
    or in the repeated passage at 4.5.13, *prajñāna*).

[^540]: Perception has been described in terms of the progress through
    more refined meditations (*samādhi*). Only then does
    the "knowledge" (*ñāṇa*) of insight arise.

[^541]: The term "specific condition" (*idappaccayā*) is
    well known from dependent origination (eg. [SN
    12.20:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.20/en/sujato#2.3)), where
    it applies to the general situation of ongoing existence in
    transmigration. When developing insight, a meditator takes their own
    meditation experience as their primary locus. This is then
    generalized to an understanding of the nature of conscious
    existence.

[^542]: This draws from the initial presentation of different theories
    of the person and perception ([DN
    9:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#6.4)).

[^543]: "Believe" is *paccesi*, literally "fall back on". It implies
    that an idea is something one relies on or takes as fundamental. The
    Buddha wants to know where Poṭṭhapāda stands before
    exploring this topic.

[^544]: Despite his previous questions about perception and the self,
    Poṭṭhapāda takes his stand on a purely materialist
    view, identifying the "self" with the organic "substantial" body.

[^545]: Again, the Buddha does not rush to tell Poṭṭhapāda
    he is right or wrong, but rather draws out the implications of his
    statement.

[^546]: Here *tiṭṭhateva* is not "leaving aside", but
    "remains". Compare the similar construction at [MN
    107:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn107/en/sujato#13.1).

[^547]: This is the "subtle" (*sukhuma*) body, corresponding with the
    form experienced in the four jhānas. All manuscripts
    appear to be missing the expected *rūpī* in this
    passage, but it occurs in the corresponding passage on
    "reincarnation" below.

[^548]: This identifies the self as that which is experienced in the
    formless attainments. Poṭṭhapāda is simply cycling
    through possible self theories without really thinking through the
    implications.

[^549]: Poṭṭhapāda can only attest a belief in various
    theories and still does not know how to assess them for himself.

[^550]: The text shifts from *añña* "other" (eg.
   *aññadiṭṭhikena*) to *aññatra*
    (*aññatr'āyogena*), which normally means
    "apart from". Most authorities follow the commentary in taking
   *aññatra* here in the sense of "other". However I think
    the change of sense is deliberate; the Buddha is not discouraging
    them, merely informing them what it will take.

[^551]: This is the famous list of ten "undeclared points", which are
    found throughout the suttas (eg. [MN
    25:10.21](https://suttacentral.net/mn25/en/sujato#10.21), [MN
    63:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn63/en/sujato#2.3), [MN
    72:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn72/en/sujato#3.1), and the whole
    of SN 44). They seem to have functioned as a kind of checklist by
    which philosophers could be evaluated and classified. \| The word
   *loka* occurs in a number of senses, but here it refers to the
    entire "cosmos" of countless worlds.

[^552]: This phrase recurs at [SN
    21.9:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.9/en/sujato#1.4) and [AN
    3.64:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.64/en/sujato#11.1), with
    some variant readings.

[^553]: The commentary says Citta was the son of an elephant trainer.
    Here he shows greater respect to the Buddha than does
    Poṭṭhapāda.

[^554]: This point seems to be lost on a number of modern commentators,
    who infer from passages such as the ten undeclared points that the
    Buddha refused to make any definitive declarations at all. The
    Buddha, rather, was a *vibhajjavādin* ([MN
    99:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#4.4), [AN
    10.94:4.7](https://suttacentral.net/an10.94/en/sujato#4.7)), "one
    who speaks after analysis".

[^555]: See [DN
    1:2.38.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.2).

[^556]: The Buddha does not rely on rumor; he begins by checking his
    facts with those concerned. Not only does this affirm his commitment
    to truth, it shows respect and establishes a common ground from
    which the argument proceeds.

[^557]: The verb *viharati* means "dwell", and functions as an auxiliary
    verb implying duration. In spiritual contexts it often means "a
    period or state of meditation". This first question is asking
    whether they see such a state in a regular meditation practice.

[^558]: Perhaps they might not be able to develop a meditation for
    seeing that self, but at some point they may have had some sort of
    perception or vision or insight.

[^559]: Since they have no experience, they might at least have an idea
    how to reach that experience.

[^560]: They haven't even heard a report about it.

[^561]: "No demonstrable basis" renders *appāṭihīrakataṁ*.
    This is related to *pāṭihāra*, which is usually
    understood as "miracle, wonder". But the root sense is
    "demonstration" and the sense of "display of wonder" is secondary.

[^562]: *Janapadakalyāṇī* is typically rendered as "the
    most beautiful lady in the land". At [SN
    47.20:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.20/en/sujato#2.2) we learn
    that she is a dazzling singer and dancer. And while she was famed
    for her beauty ([Ud
    3.2:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/ud3.2/en/sujato#9.1)), the word
   *kalyāṇa* normally means "(morally) good, fine, lovely"
    and does not refer solely to her appearance.

[^563]: *Nisseni* only occurs elsewhere in [Bu Ss
    6:2.3.6](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss6/en/sujato#2.3.6)
    and [Bu Ss
    7:2.67](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss7/en/sujato#2.67),
    where it is something carried, i.e. a ladder rather than a flight of
    stairs.

[^564]: *Attapaṭilābha* is literally "re-acquisition of
    self", where *attā* is explained by the commentary as
   *attabhāva*, the "state of the self" or "life-form"
    that is acquired at rebirth, i.e. the body (*sarīra*),
    whether material or immaterial.

[^565]: These recap the three theses of perception and the self posted
    by Poṭṭhapāda from [DN
    9:22.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#22.1).

[^566]: Compare with the similar sentiment at [SN
    22.2:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.2/en/sujato#10.1).

[^567]: The Buddha points to the experience to demonstrate what he is
    talking about, rather than offering a long theoretical explanation.
   *Ayaṁ* is a pronoun of presence, used to indicate what
    is apparent before the subject.

[^568]: Citta is asking an ontological question, assuming that these
    three states are existent realities of the self.

[^569]: The Buddha reframes the question as one of conventional
    description. He is describing states in which one might be reborn,
    not underlying ontologies.

[^570]: This anticipates one of the great philosophical debates of
    sectarian Buddhists which gave rise to the
    Sarvāstivāda, the school whose core doctrine was that
    "all exists (in the past, future, and present)". The Buddha
    describes past, future, and present with the three grammatical
    tenses.

[^571]: Compare Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 3.3.3.2.

[^572]: Words such as "self" have a conventional usage and in that
    context are perfectly fine. But what that "self" refers to is
    constantly changing, as it is reincarnated in different states. It
    is like a river which keeps the same name even though the water is
    always changing. If, driven by attachment, we assume there is a
    metaphysical reality underlying the conventional "self", we step
    beyond what can be empirically verified. Note, however, that the
    Buddha is *not* asserting that there are two levels of truth,
    conventional and ultimate, a distinction not found in early
    Buddhism. \| Compare [MN
    139:3.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn139/en/sujato#3.9), [MN
    74:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn74/en/sujato#13.1).

[^573]: In [AN 6.60](https://suttacentral.net/an6.60/en/sujato) we find
    Citta Hatthisāriputta, still a somewhat junior monk,
    rudely interrupting his seniors. After admonition he disrobed, but
    he ordained again and later achieved arahantship. We can reconcile
    these two accounts by recognizing that the phrase *acira* "not long
    after" is a conventional term, which might be several years. Thus
    the events of AN 6.60 occurred some time between his ordination and
    awakening.

[^574]: Ānanda's role became more prominent as a leader of the
    Saṅgha in the years after the Buddha's passing. This
    sutta shows the continued propagation of the Buddha's teachings
    after his death.

[^575]: The same Subha earlier met the Buddha in [MN
    99](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato) and again in [MN
    135](https://suttacentral.net/mn135/en/sujato), where he asked about
    kamma. His father Todeyya was a prominent brahmin, often mentioned
    alongside Pokkharasāti. The two apparently lived not
    far from each other, as, according to the commentary, Todeyya was
    named for his village of Tudi outside of Sāvatthī (see
    Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī 4.3.94). \| These
    events suggest a certain, albeit tenuous, timeframe for the
    significant conversion of influential brahmins initiated by
    Pokkharasāti in [DN
    3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato). Here, Subha is active
    after the Buddha's death, suggesting his age is aligned with that of
    Ānanda, a generation younger than the Buddha. If this is so, Subha's
    first meeting with the Buddha would have taken place no earlier than
    the middle period of his teaching, perhaps twenty years before the
    Parinibbāna (MN 99). There he mentions
    Pokkharasāti's hostility to the claims of ascetics, so
    this must precede Pokkharasāti's conversion in DN 3 by
    a considerable period. If we are on the right track, the conversion
    of Pokkharasāti, and the events that flowed from that,
    must have happened late in the Buddha's career, perhaps in the final
    decade of his life.

[^576]: Ānanda was getting old.

[^577]: Cetaka is mentioned only here. The commentary says he was named
    for his home country of Cetī, which is roughly the
    modern region of Bundelkhand, about 500 km south-west of
    Sāvatthī.

[^578]: What follows has much the same content as [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), but arranged under these
    three heads rather than as successively refined happiness.

[^579]: While *samādhi* proper is the deep immersion in
    meditation, here it is a category that pertains to developing such
    states.

[^580]: He had already gone to the Buddha for refuge in [MN
    99:28.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#28.4) and [MN
    135:21.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn135/en/sujato#21.4).

[^581]: This was the scene for some controversial discussions with Jains
    ([MN 56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato), [SN
    42.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn42.8/en/sujato)), and
    Sāriputta's touching declaration of faith shortly
    before his passing ([SN
    47.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.12/en/sujato), [DN
    16:1.16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#1.16.1), [DN
    28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato)). It is probably the
    Pāvā (modern Pawapuri) at which Mahāvīra
    died according to the Jain tradition.

[^582]: Kevaḍḍha is mentioned only here. Manuscripts spell
    his name variously as Kevaddha or Kevaṭṭa
    ("fisherman"). The Chinese form means "sturdy" (from
   *dṛḍha*) and thus supports Kevaḍḍha.

[^583]: I have been asked to do the same thing for the same reason.

[^584]: In fact it is forbidden in [Kd
    15:8.2.23](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd15/en/sujato#8.2.23).

[^585]: The reading *dhaṁsemi* is dubious. An old Burmese
    manuscript has the reading *dhammaṁ desemi*, which
    echoes the Buddha just above. Note too that Kevaḍḍha
    urges the Buddha to "direct" the monks (*samādisatu*,
    from the same root as *desemi*). I think the tension is deliberate:
    Kevaḍḍha says he isn't telling the Buddha how to teach,
    but he absolutely is. Other readings convey the sense "attack,
    insult", but this seems out of place.

[^586]: As noted previously, the basic sense of
   *pāṭihāriya* is "demonstration", and as the context
    here shows, it may or may not involve a "demonstration of wonders"
    i.e. a "miracle".

[^587]: These three are mentioned frequently in the suttas. Only the
    last is endorsed by the Buddha, as it leads to genuine growth.

[^588]: Their priors have been confirmed.

[^589]: Note how a skeptical mindset sticks closer to the truth.

[^590]: "Spell" is *vijjā* (Sanskrit *vidyā*,
    "(potent) knowledge", cf. English "wicca", "wizard", "witch"). The
    commentary says it was practiced by the seers of
    Gandhāra (north-west Pakistan). Jain tradition also
    knows a Gandhārī mantra, but attribute it to certain
   *vidyādhara* deities. Sanskrit tradition similarly
    knows of a *vidyādevī* ("lore goddess") named
    Gandhārī. Gandhāra was an ancient land of
    learning, and a convenient location for exotic magics.

[^591]: These feats that have nothing to do with spiritual growth, hence
    they may be produced or perhaps faked by a variety of means.

[^592]: "Revealing" is *ādesana*, from root *dis* "to
    indicate, show, or point".

[^593]: The Pali terms here are *citta*, *cetasika*, *vitakka*, and
   *vicāra*.

[^594]: Here we have *mano* (twice) and *citta*.

[^595]: From *maṇi*, "gem". Magical gems are a common
    feature of Indian storytelling. Buddhist stories often feature the
    "wish-granting gem" (*cintāmaṇi*), which according to
    the commentary is meant here.

[^596]: This story is presented as an actual event, but is phrased like
    a fable.

[^597]: The question is about meditation, not the annihilation of the
    material world. The first four *jhānas* are based on
    the "subtle form" (*sukhumarūpa*) that manifests as
    light in deep meditation. He is asking how to go beyond this to the
    formless attainments.

[^598]: The mendicant has already well developed the
   *jhānas*. \| "Controlling the body as far as the
    Brahmā realm" is one of the "demonstrations of psychic
    power" listed above.

[^599]: The "gods of the Four Great Kings" are deities born in a realm
    subject to the overlords known as the Four Great Kings. These
    deities inhabit the lowest of the celestial realms.

[^600]: These are powerful spirits who guard the four quarters. In [AN
    8.36](https://suttacentral.net/an8.36/en/sujato) it is explained
    that they, like the other leading gods mentioned below, achieved
    their station due to their greater generosity and morality.

[^601]: The "thirty-three" enjoy refined sensual delights. The number is
    a reduplication of the trinity. In Buddhist texts they are not
    enumerated, but Yājñavalkya reckons them as eight
    Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Ādityas, plus Indra and
    Prajāpati (Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 3.9.2). The final pair are elsewhere said to
    be Dyaus ("Heaven" = Zeus) and Pṛthivī ("Earth"), or
    the twin Aśvins.

[^602]: Conventionally known as "lord of gods", but in fact the ruler
    only of the relatively lowly realm of the thirty-three. He is Vedic
    Indra, heroic slayer of the dragon Vṛtra, and is the
    most personally known god in the Pali Canon.

[^603]: Gods in this realm (spelled *yāma*, "of Yama") are
    subjects of the god of the dead, Yama.

[^604]: The previous deities achieved their station by mere morality and
    generosity, not by *jhāna*. The gods of
    Brahmā's Host practiced the first *jhāna*,
    but they do not know what lies beyond.

[^605]: The same passage appears in [DN
    1:2.5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.5.2), where it
    also had a satirical tone, poking fun at the pomposity of religious
    titles.

[^606]: Even Brahmā's community are not confident.

[^607]: This passage may be one of the sources for the later use of
   *nimitta* to mean the appearance of light that signifies the
    approach of *jhāna*.

[^608]: He puffs his own chest, but like the ascetic teachers of [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), he does not answer the
    question.

[^609]: He addresses Brahmā with *āvuso*. This
    is often translated as "friend", but the root is *āyu*
    ("age") and it is respectful not familiar.

[^610]: Rather than trying to engage with Brahmā's agenda,
    he keeps restating his question. This is a skillful way of curbing
    narcissism.

[^611]: Brahmā is embarrassed to reveal his ignorance.
    Perhaps a satire of Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
    3.2.13, where Yājñavalkya takes
    Jāratkārava Ārtabhāga by the hand and
    leads him aside for a secret discussion.

[^612]: At least he is honest about his lack of knowledge, even if not
    publicly.

[^613]: The following verses are difficult because they speak of a kind
    of consciousness at the start and the cessation of consciousness at
    the end. The simplest way to resolve this is to assume there are two
    distinct questions.

[^614]: This is a rephrasing of the original question, asking where the
    four "form" *jhānas* end.

[^615]: Here starts the second question, asking the deeper question of
    how all these things end. A similar list of descriptors elsewhere
    describes things that are not stolen ([Snp
    3.9:45.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#45.1)) or the
    kinds of sentient beings ([Snp
    1.8:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.8/en/sujato#4.3)). These are
    aspects of how "form" manifests in desirable or undesirable ways.

[^616]: The first four terms in this verse are identical with the first
    four terms in Yājñavalkya's description of the
    immutable Brahman as "neither coarse nor fine, neither short nor
    long" at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.8.8.

[^617]: "Where nothing appears" (*anidassanaṁ*) here is a
    synonym for "formless" (see eg. [MN
    21:14.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#14.8), "space is
    formless and invisible", *ākāso arūpī
    anidassano*). Normally the colors and images seen in the "form"
    absorptions are described as "visible" (eg. [DN
    16:3.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.29.1)), so this
    indicates the formless attainments.

[^618]: "Infinite" (*ananta*) is the direct qualifier of
    "consciousness", but in the Pali it is shifted to the next line to
    fit the meter. It indicates the second of the formless attainments.
    Yājñavalkya describes consciousness as infinite in the
    famous passage at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
    2.4.12. \| *Pabhaṁ* means "luminous", as with the
    deities that are "self-luminous" (*sayaṁpabhā*, [DN
    27:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#10.3)). *Sabbato
    pabhaṁ* ("luminous all-round") is synonymous with
   *pariyodāta* ("bright", literally "white all over"), a
    stock descriptor of the mind of fourth *jhāna*, on
    which the formless states are based.

[^619]: I read these verses as broken into two statements. The first
    part, ending here, speaks of the formless attainments as "infinite
    consciousness", agreeing with the highest of the Brahmanical
    meditative sages. The following verses go further to speak of the
    cessation of consciousness.

[^620]: According to dependent origination, when consciousness ceases,
    name and form cease, and with it the manifestation of all things
    desirable and undesirable in the world.

[^621]: This is the only appearance of a place called
    Sālavatikā ("Abounding in Sal Trees"). A courtesan of
    Rājagaha named Sālavatī appears in [Kd
    8:1.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd8/en/sujato#1.3.1); she
    might perhaps have come from there.

[^622]: A certain brahmin Lohicca also appears in [SN
    35.132](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.132/en/sujato). But since that
    is set far away in Avantī after the Buddha's passing,
    and since in both cases he is said to have taken refuge, it seems
    likely these are different people.

[^623]: A similar view is sometimes unjustly imputed to the
    Theravādins, that they are only interested in their own
    liberation.

[^624]: While *nhāpita* would seem to be identical with
   *nhāpaka* ("bathroom attendant"), it is usually
    translated per [Ja 395](https://suttacentral.net/ja395/en/sujato)
    where it means "barber".

[^625]: Note the unusual use of *kira* in this idiom, found in [SN
    35.133:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.133/en/sujato#2.3), [MN
    85:3.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn85/en/sujato#3.5), [MN
    127:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn127/en/sujato#2.5), and [Ud
    2.8:6.8](https://suttacentral.net/ud2.8/en/sujato#6.8). I think this
    expresses polite deference, and render with "might" rather than
    "would".

[^626]: It seems the barber was not only a trusted confidant, but an
    intelligent man with sincere concern for Lohicca's well being.

[^627]: The Buddha is modest as to his chances.

[^628]: Here the Buddha takes the initiative. "Harmful misconception" is
   *pāpakaṁ diṭṭhigataṁ*.

[^629]: Kosala is the native realm of Pasenadi. Kāsi had
    formerly been an independent kingdom, but was taken over by
    Pasenadi's father Mahākosala. Towards the end of the
    Buddha's life it was contested between Kosala and Magadha ([SN
    3.14](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.14/en/sujato), [SN
    3.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.15/en/sujato)). Ultimately it
    became part of the greater Magadhan empire.

[^630]: It is only through sharing what good things we know that we can
    support each other.

[^631]: Even though he has characterized Lohicca's view as harmful, the
    Buddha goes out of his way to show that it is not entirely wrong.
    There are cases where it is best to avoid teaching.

[^632]: The genders of this passage are made clear through the use of
    feminine nouns. Making unwelcome advances was seen as an obvious
    example of something wrong.

[^633]: At [DN 29:5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#5.2) the
    opposite sense is expressed as *samādāya
    taṁ dhammaṁ vattati*.

[^634]: The Buddha adopts Lohicca's formulation, but applies it in a
    specific sense, not as a generalization.

[^635]: Now that the Buddha has established a degree of overlap between
    their views, Lohicca wants to hear more.

[^636]: Again, the Buddha answers directly and simply.

[^637]: *Naraka* means "cliff" or "abyss" in early Pali ([MN
    49:5.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn49/en/sujato#5.9), [MN
    86:6.15](https://suttacentral.net/mn86/en/sujato#6.15), [Snp
    3.11:28.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato#28.4), [Thag
    16.8:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/thag16.8/en/sujato#4.2)). It does
    not have the sense "hell" until the late canonical period; the early
    Pali term for hell is *niraya*. Notably, *naraka* is not strongly
    attested in the sense of "hell" for pre-Buddhist Sanskrit either,
    although we do find *nāraka*, apparently in the sense
    of "hell being", at Atharva Veda 12.4.36c and Śukla Yajur Veda 30.5.

[^638]: Manasākaṭa is mentioned only here.

[^639]: Aciravatī is called Rapti today. It was one of the
    great rivers that flowed from the Himalayas through Kosala into the
    Ganges.

[^640]: Similar discussions are found in [MN
    98](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato) = [Snp
    3.9](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato) and [DN
    27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato). \| The compound
   *maggāmagga* can be read either as "what is the path
    and what is not the path" (per commentary, *magge ca amagge ca*), or
    as "the variety of paths" (compare *phalāphala*, "all
    sorts of fruit"). Here, however, they are concerned to distinguish
    one path as correct.

[^641]: This must have been earlier than Pokkharasāti's
    conversion at [DN
    3:2.22.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#2.22.1).
    Pokkharasāti was a family man who denied the reality of
    superhuman meditative attainments ([MN
    99:10.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.4)) and
    emphasized ethics and duties over lineage ([MN
    98:3.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#3.7)), which agrees
    with him being cited on ethical matters at Āpastamba Dharmasūtra
    1.6.19.7 and 1.10.28. \| *Brahmasahabyatā* does not
    mean "union with Brahmā" but rather "rebirth as one of
    the members of Brahma's retinue" (see eg. [AN
    5.34:9.4](https://suttacentral.net/an5.34/en/sujato#9.4)). The
    non-dualist concept that the limited personal self merges with the
    cosmic divinity is expressed in Pali, rather, with such phrases as
   *so attā so loko* ("the self is identical with the
    cosmos"). \| For *añjasa* ("direct route") see [SN
    12.65:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65/en/sujato#7.1) and note.

[^642]: In Pali we never meet Tārukkha and he is only
    mentioned in his absence. He evidently advocated that lineage rather
    than conduct made one a brahmin ([MN
    98:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#3.4)). There is a
    Tārukṣya whose view was that union (with
    Brahmā) arose with the conjunction of speech and
    breath; this was discussed alongside the views of many other
    brahmins (Aitareya Āraṇyaka 3.1.6.1;
    Śāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka 7.19). In Rig Veda
    8.46.32 a certain Balbūtha Tarukṣa the
    Dāsa makes an offering to a sage. Sāyaṇa,
    the Vedic commentator, says that Balbūtha
    Tarukṣa was a guardian of cows, evidently alluding to
    the Aitareya Āraṇyaka, which describes
    Tārukṣya as a guardian of his teacher's cows, thus
    locating Tārukṣya in the lineage of
    Tarukṣa. Hiraṇyakeśīgṛhyasūtra 2.8.19 also
    mentions him as a teacher, there spelled Tarukṣa.

[^643]: Identified by Wijesekera (*A Pali Reference to
    Brāhmaṇa-Caraṇas*, Adyar Library Bulletin,
    vol 20, 1956; reprinted in *Buddhist and Vedic Studies*) and
    Jayatilleke (*Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge*, p. 480). I use
    the familiar Sanskrit forms, as the Pali has several dubious
    spellings and variants. Their texts and corresponding Vedas are
    respectively: Adhvaryu = Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (incl.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad; White Yajur Veda);
    Taittirīya = Taittirīya
    Brāhmaṇa (Black Yajur Veda); Chāndogya =
    Chāndogya Brāhmaṇa (Sāman
    Veda); Cāndrāyaṇa (omitted from MS edition) =
    Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa (Rig Veda; spelling
    established by Wijesekera; see below at [DN
    13:16.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#16.2));
    Bahvṛca = Bahvṛca Brāhmaṇa
    (Rig Veda; incorporated in Aitareya and Kauśītaki.)
    This is the only time the Pali canon mentions these schools, but in
    some cases we can identify them with brahmins in the canon. Examples
    include the murmuring Chāndogya brahmin ([Ud
    1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.4/en/sujato)); or the Buddha's
    former teachers, who evidently hailed from the Addhariya tradition
    of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa ([MN
    26:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#15.1)ff.). \|
    Jayatilleke notes that the Śatapatha describes its own adherents as
    Adhvaryu (*addhariyā*), those priests of the Yajur Veda
    responsible for the physical acts at the ritual.

[^644]: Earlier they were arguing over which one of the paths was
    correct, whereas now they have shifted to a more universalist "many
    roads up the same mountain" position. When speaking with each other
    they saw each others' views as contradictory, but when speaking with
    an outsider they adopted a more conciliatory position.

[^645]: The ten names in Pali include the seven authors of the so-called
    "family books" of the Rig Veda (Maṇḍalas 2--8). As
    founders of poetic lineages, we often find works by their
    descendants, which are not always confined to their dedicated family
    book. Poems by the other three authors are mostly outside the family
    books. Thus the sages listed here cover most of the Rig Veda,
    although the Vedic tradition records many other authors as well. \|
    Aṭṭhaka = Atri Bhauma (Maṇḍala 5, rather
    than Aṣṭaka Vaiśvāmitra of 10.104);
    Vāmaka = Vamra(ka) Vaikhānasa (10.99; see
    9.66); Vāmadeva = Vāmadeva Gautama
    (Maṇḍala 4); Vessāmitta =
    Viśvāmitra Gāthina (Maṇḍala
    3); Yamadaggi = Jamadagni Bhārgava, a descendant of
    Bhṛgu (several hymns mostly in Maṇḍalas 9
    and 10); Aṅgīrasa = Aṅgirasa, identified
    with Agni as the founder of a lineage of poet-singers
    (Maṇḍala 8); Bhāradvāja =
    Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
    (Maṇḍala 6); Vāseṭṭha =
    Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
    (Maṇḍala 7); Kassapa = Kaśyapa
    Mārīca (several hymns mostly in Maṇḍalas 9
    and 10); Bhagu = Bhṛgu, the bringer of fire from heaven
    whose adoptive descendant was Gṛtsamada
    Bhārgava Śaunaka (Maṇḍala 2).

[^646]: Unlike the Buddhist monk at [DN
    11:80.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn11/en/sujato#80.1).

[^647]: "No demonstrable basis" is *appāṭihīrakataṁ*.

[^648]: The "blind following the blind" is also at [MN
    95:13.24](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#13.24) and [MN
    99:9.25](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#9.25).
    Maitrī Upaniṣad 7.8--9 turns it around,
    saying that the blind teach false doctrines aimed at destroying the
    Vedas, "the doctrine of not-self" (*nairātmyavāda*), an
    obvious reference to Buddhists. We also find it at
    Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.5,
    Mahābhārata 2.38.3, and the Jain Sūyagaḍa
    1.1.2.19.

[^649]: Kuṣītaka worshiped the rising and setting sun and
    moon, turning himself to follow their course (Kauṣītaki
    Upaniṣad 2.7--9). He founded the Kauṣītaki
    lineage, referred to above as "those who follow the course of the
    moon" (*cāndrāyaṇa*).

[^650]: Indra taught Bhāradvāja a new threefold knowledge
    by which he might become immortal and realize companionship
    (*sāyujya*) with the sun (Taittirīya
    Brāhmaṇa 3.10.11.15).

[^651]: The bulk of the Vedic texts consist of prayers and invocations
    to various gods.

[^652]: Soma is the ritual drug of exhilaration, identified with the
    moon. \| Vedic Varuṇa was the god of command, the king
    of tough rule. \| Īsāna (Sanskrit Īśāna)
    was created by Pajāpati as "ruler", said to be the sun
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 6.1.3). He was later identified
    with Rudra and Śiva. \| Pajāpati ("progenitor") was the
    lonely god of creation; the heat of his fervent exertions (*tapas*)
    created the world and all things in it (Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 6). \| Brahmā, like
    Pajāpati, is also a creator god, but is the divine
    power immanent within creation, rather than the forgotten instigator
    of the past. \| The Mahāsaṅgīti reading Mahiddhi
    ("great power") does not seem to correspond with any particular
    Vedic deity. Accept the BJT reading Mahinda (Sanskrit Mahendra), the
    "Great Indra", said to be a title of Indra bestowed after slaying
    the dragon Vṛtra (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa
    2.5.4.9). \| Yama ("twin", with his incestuous sister
    Yamī) was born immortal but chose mortality, becoming
    the god of the dead.

[^653]: I wonder if this is a satire on the idea of
   *upaniṣad* ("sitting near"); even as they affirm their
    commitment to their texts, they drift apart (*visāra*)
    into separate schools and ideologies.

[^654]: The close *-ti* has apparently confused some editors;
    Vāseṭṭha is quoting what he has heard.

[^655]: Here the four *brahmavihāras* ("meditations of
    Brahmā") stand in place of the four
   *jhānas*. *Brahmavihāras* are simply one
    of the means by which *jhānas* may be attained, chosen
    here to fit the stated goal of teaching the path to
    Brahmā. The suttas treat them as pre-Buddhist, but they
    have not been traced as a group in pre-Buddhist texts. However, they
    are shared with later non-Buddhist texts such as
    Yogasūtra 1.33 and the Jain
    Tattvārthasūtra 7.11. \| "Love" (*mettā*)
    is a universal positive regard and well-wishing free of personal
    desires or attachments. It ultimately derives from the Vedic in the
    sense of "union"; Mitra was the god of alliances (Rig Veda 3.59).

[^656]: The mind in *jhāna* is so powerful that it
    effectively overrides any limited kamma, including ordinary good or
    bad deeds. Unless they have committed serious crimes with a fixed
    kammic result such as matricide, etc., the meditator will be reborn
    in a Brahmā realm.

[^657]: "Compassion" (*karuṇā*) is the quality of empathy
    with the suffering of another or oneself and the wish to remove it.

[^658]: "Rejoicing" (*muditā*) is joyful celebration in the
    success of others or oneself, free of jealousy or cynicism.

[^659]: Equanimity (*upekkhā*) is literally "close
    watching", not interfering but standing ready when needed. It is not
    indifference, which is why it emerges only at the end, after the
    positive emotions are developed.

[^660]: A brahmin student who for their whole life practices
    harmlessness for all beings---except at holy places---attains the
    world of Brahmā (Chāndogya
    Upaniṣad 8.15.1). The exception for holy places is, of
    course, to allow for the sacrifice.

[^661]: Here the entire concluding section of the Gradual Training
    dealing with wisdom is omitted, as the aim is limited to teaching
    rebirth with Brahmā to Brahmanical laypeople, rather
    than teaching liberation. Vāseṭṭha and
    Bhāradvāja later applied to ordain, in which time the
    Buddha taught the full path to Nibbana ([DN
    27:7.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#7.8)).

[^662]: They also went for refuge in similar circumstances at [MN
    98:14.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#14.4) = [Snp
    3.9:69.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#69.3). According
    to the commentary, that was the first time they went for refuge,
    while this was the second time. This makes sense in terms of the
    progress of the teachings, for there they discuss what makes a
    brahmin, whereas here they ask the more subtle question how to
    achieve rebirth with Brahmā. The discussion, too, is on
    a more detailed level, with a more explicit criticism of the
    brahmins. Nonetheless, it is difficult to square the details of the
    narratives, for the opening of this sutta depicts
    Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja speaking about the
    Buddha by reputation rather than as devotees who have previously met
    him and gone for refuge.
