# The Chapter on Coolness

### N 6.85 Coolness  *Sītibhāvasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize supreme
coolness. What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't keep their mind in
check when they should. They don't exert their mind when they should.
They don't encourage the mind when they should. They don't watch over
the mind with equanimity when they should. They have bad convictions.
They delight in substantial reality. A mendicant with these six
qualities can't realize supreme coolness.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize supreme coolness. What six?
It's when a mendicant keeps their mind in check when they should. They
exert their mind when they should. They encourage the mind when they
should. They watch over the mind with equanimity when they should. They
have excellent convictions. They delight in extinguishment. A mendicant
with these six qualities can realize supreme coolness."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.86 Obstacles  *Āvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They're obstructed by deeds, defilements, or
results. And they're faithless, unenthusiastic, and witless. Someone
with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They're not obstructed by deeds, defilements, or results. And they're
faithful, enthusiastic, and wise. Someone with these six qualities is
able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when
listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.87 A Murderer  *Voropitasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They cause a
schism in the Saṅgha. They're witless, dull, and idiotic.
Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They don't murder their mother or father or a perfected one. They don't
maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They don't cause a schism
in the Saṅgha. They're wise, bright, and clever. Someone
with these six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.88 Wanting to Listen  *Sussūsatisutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the
Realized One is being taught they don't want to listen. They don't
actively listen or try to understand. They learn the incorrect meaning
and reject the correct meaning. They accept views that contradict the
teaching. Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the Realized One is being
taught they want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand.
They learn the correct meaning and reject the incorrect meaning. They
accept views that conform with the teaching. Someone with these six
qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful
qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.89 Not Giving Up  *Appahāyasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't become accomplished
in view. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. Without giving up these six things
you can't become accomplished in view.

After giving up six things you can become accomplished in view. What
six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth
in places of loss. After giving up these six things you can become
accomplished in view."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.90 Given Up  *Pahīnasutta*

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view has given up these six
things. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. A person accomplished in view has
given up these six things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.91 Can't Give Rise  *Abhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view can't give rise to six
things. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. A person accomplished in view can't
give rise to these six things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.92 Things That Can't Be Done (1st)  *Paṭhamaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't live disrespectful and irreverent toward the
Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, or the training. They
can't establish their belief on unreliable grounds. And they can't
generate an eighth rebirth. These are the six things that can't be
done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.93 Things That Can't Be Done (2nd)  *Dutiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't take conditions to be permanent. They cannot
take conditions to be happiness. They cannot take anything to be the
self. They can't do deeds with fixed result in the next life. They can't
fall back on purification through boisterous, superstitious rites. They
can't seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of
religious donations. These are the six things that can't be done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.94 Things That Can't Be Done (3rd)  *Tatiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They can't maliciously shed the blood of the Realized One. They
can't cause a schism in the Saṅgha. They can't dedicate
themselves to another teacher. These are the six things that can't be
done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.95 Things That Can't Be Done (4th)  *Catutthaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
are made by oneself, or that they're made by another, or that they're
made by both. Nor can they fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
arise by chance, not made by oneself, by another, or by both. Why is
that? It is because a person accomplished in view has clearly seen
causes and the phenomena that arise from causes. These are the six
things that can't be done."

