SUTTA 39

[^415]: "Brahmin" should be understood in the sense explained below, §24.

[^416]: Shame (hiri) and fear of wrongdoing (ottappa) are two complementary qualities designated by the Buddha "the guardians of the world" (AN i.51) because they serve as the foundation for morality. Shame has the characteristic of disgust with evil, is dominated by a sense of selfrespect, and manifests itself as conscience. Fear of wrongdoing has the characteristic of dread of evil, is dominated by a concern for the opinions of others, and manifests itself as fear of doing evil. See Vsm XIV, 142.

[^417]: MA quotes SN 45:35-36/v.25: "What, bhikkhus, is recluseship (sāmañña)? The Noble Eightfold Path... - this is called recluseship. And what, bhikkhus, is the goal of recluseship (sāmañnattho)? The destruction of greed, hate, and delusion - this is called the goal of recluseship."

[^418]: MA gives a detailed elaboration of each of the five similes. An English translation can be found in Nyanaponika Thera, The Five Mental Hindrances, pp. 27-34.

[^419]: Each of the explanations to follow involves a word play that cannot be reproduced in English, e.g., a bhikkhu is a recluse (samaña) because he has quieted down (samita) evil states, a brahmin because he has expelled (bähita) evil states, etc.

[^420]: The term "washed" (nhātaka) refers to a brahmin who, at the end of his discipleship under his teacher, has taken a ceremonial bath marking the end of his training. See Sn 521.

[^421]: The Pali word sotthiya (Sanskrit, srotriya) means a brahmin well versed in the Vedas, one conversant with sacred knowledge.

