# 92. Discourse with Sela

## Sela Sutta

#### THUS have I heard:

 At one time the Lord walking on tour among the people of Anguttarāpa,[2]
 together with a large Order of monks,
 with twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 arrived at the market town called Āpaṇa
 belonging to the people of Anguttarāpa.

 Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic[3] heard:

 "Verily the recluse Gotama,
 son of the Sakyans,
 having gone forth from the Sakyan clan,
 walking on tour among the people of Anguttarāpa
 together with a large Order of monks,
 with twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 has reached Āpaṇa.
 [333] The most lovely report has gone abroad thus
 concerning this revered Gotama:[4]

 'He is indeed Lord,
 perfected one,
 fully Self-Awakened One,
 endowed with knowledge and (right) conduct,
 Well-farer,
 knower of the worlds,
 the matchless charioteer of men to be tamed,
 teacher of devas and mankind,
 the Awakened One,
 the Lord.

 Having realised through his own super-knowledge,
 he makes known this world
 together with devas
 including the Māras and the Brahmās;
 creatures
 together with recluses and brahmans,
 with devas and mankind.

 He teaches dhamma
 that is lovely at the beginning,
 lovely in the middle
 and lovely at the ending;
 he explains with the spirit and the letter
 the Brahma-faring
 completely fulfilled
 and wholly purified.

 Good indeed is the sight
 of perfected ones such as this."

 Then Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 approached the Lord;
 having approached,
 he exchanged greetings with the Lord;
 having conversed in a friendly and courteous way,
 he sat down at a respectful distance.

 As the matted hair ascetic Keṇiya
 was sitting down at a respectful distance
 the Lord delighted,
 roused,
 inspired,
 gladdened him
 with talk on dhamma.

 Then Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic,
 delighted,
 roused,
 inspired,
 gladdened by the Lord
 with talk on dhamma,
 spoke thus to the Lord:

 "May the good Gotama
 together with the Order of monks
 consent to a meal with me
 on the morrow."[5]

 When this had been said,
 the Lord spoke thus
 to Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic:

 "But, Keṇiya,
 great is the Order of monks,
 twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 and you are favourably disposed towards[6] the brahmans."
 And a second time did Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 speak thus to the Lord:

 "Although, good Gotama,
 the Order of monks is large,
 twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 and although I am favourably disposed towards the brahmans,
 (yet) may the good Gotama consent to a meal with me
 on the morrow
 together with the Order of monks."

 And a second time did the Lord speak thus
 to Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic:

 "But, Keṇiya,
 great is the Order of monks,
 twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 and you are favourably disposed towards the brahmans."

 And a third time did Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 speak thus to the Lord:

 "Although, good Gotama,
 the Order of monks is large,
 twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 and although I am favourably disposed towards the brahmans,
 (yet) may the good Gotama consent to a meal with me
 on the morrow
 together with the Order of monks."

 The Lord consented by becoming silent.

 Then Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic,
 having understood the Lord's consent,
 rising from his seat,
 approached his own hermitage;
 having approached,
 he addressed his friends and acquaintances,
 his kith and kin,
 saying:

 "Let my good friends and acquaintances,
 my kith and kin,
 hear that the recluse Gotama
 together with the Order of monks
 has been invited [334] by me for a meal on the morrow.

 So would you do personal service for me?"

 "Yes, good sir,"
 and when the friends and acquaintances,
 the kith and kin of Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 had answered him in assent,
 some dug pits (for the fire),
 some chopped sticks,
 some washed pots,
 some put out jars of water,
 and some got ready the seats,
 while Keṇiya himself
 prepared a pavilion.[7]

 Now at that time Sela the brahman
 was living in Āpaṇa.

 He was master of the three Vedas,[8]
 versed in the vocabularies and rituals
 together with the phonology and exegesis
 and the legendary tradition as the fifth;
 he was learned in idioms,
 a grammarian,
 proficient in popular philosophy
 and the marks of a Great Man.
 He instructed three hundred brahman youths in mantras.

 At that time Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 was favourably disposed towards the brahman Sela.

 Then as Sela the brahman,
 surrounded by the three hundred brahman youths,
 was pacing up and down
 and roaming about on foot
 he approached the hermitage of Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic.

 And in the hermitage of Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 Sela the brahman saw some people digging pits,
 some chopping sticks,
 some washing pots,
 some putting out jars of water,
 and some getting ready the seats,
 while Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic himself
 prepared a pavilion.

 So he spoke thus to Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic:

 "How now, is there to be a marriage[9]
 at the good Keṇiya's
 or a giving in marriage,
 or is a great oblation arranged,
 or has King Bimbisāra of Magadha
 been invited for the morrow
 together with his troops?"

 "No, Sela, there is to be no marriage with me
 nor giving in marriage,
 nor has King Seniya Bimbisāra of Magadha
 been invited for the morrow
 together with his troops.
 But I have arranged a great oblation:
 the recluse Gotama,
 son of the Sakyans,
 gone forth from the Sakyan clan,
 who has been walking on tour among the people of Aṅguttarapa,
 together with a large Order of monks,
 with twelve hundred and fifty monks,
 has arrived at Āpaṇa.

 The most lovely report has gone abroad thus concerning the recluse Gotama:

 'He is indeed Lord,
 perfected one,
 fully Self-Awakened One,
 endowed with knowledge and (right) conduct,
 Well-farer,
 knower of the worlds,
 the matchless charioteer of men to be tamed,
 teacher of devas and mankind,
 the Awakened One,
 the Lord.

 He has been invited by me for the morrow
 together with the Order of monks."

 [335] "Keṇiya, did you say
 'Awakened One'?"

 "I did say 'Awakened One,' Sela."

 "Keṇiya, did you say 'Awakened One'?"

 "I did say 'Awakened One,' Sela."

 Then it occurred to the brahman Sela:
 "Even this sound 'Awakened One'
 is hard to come by in the world.

 But in our mantras
 the thirty-two marks of a Great Man
 are traditional.

 For a Great Man endowed with these,
 only two courses are open, not another . . .1 But if he goes forth from home into homelessness he becomes a perfected one, a fully Self-Awakened One, a lifter of the world's veil.

 For a Great Man
 possessed of these
 only two courses are open,
 not another:[10]

 If he settles in the household state
 he becomes a king who is a wheel-turner,
 a dhamma-man,
 a king under dhamma,
 the ruler of the whole world,
 one who brings stability to his realm;
 and he is possessed of the seven Treasures.

 These seven Treasures of his are
 the wheel-treasure,
 the elephant-treasure,
 the horse-treasure,
 the jewel-treasure,
 the woman-treasure,
 the householder-treasure,
 the adviser-treasure as the seventh.

 He will have more than a thousand sons,
 valiant,
 built on heroic lines,
 able to crush opposing armies.

 He dwells conquering this sea-girt land
 by dhamma,
 not by stick,
 not by sword.

 But, if he goes forth from home
 into homelessness
 he becomes a perfected one,
 a fully Self-Awakened One,
 a lifter of the world's veil.

 And where, good Keṇiya,
 is this revered Gotama,
 perfected one,
 fully Self-Awakened One,
 staying at present?"

 When this had been said, Keṇiya
 the matted hair ascetic,
 stretching out his right arm,
 spoke thus to Sela the brahman:

 "There, good Sela,
 by that dark blue line of forest."

 Then Sela the brahman
 with the three hundred brahman youths
 approached the Lord.

 Then Sela the brahman
 addressed these brahman youths,
 saying:
 "Come quietly, good sirs,
 (carefully) placing foot after foot;
 for, like lone-faring lions,[11]
 these Lords are hard to approach.

 So if I should hold converse with the recluse Gotama,
 do not interrupt me, good sirs;
 but wait for me
 until the end of the conversation."

 Then Sela the brahman approached the Lord;
 having approached,
 he exchanged greetings with the Lord;
 having conversed in a friendly and courteous way,
 he sat down at respectful distance.

 As he was sitting down at a respectful distance
 Sela the brahman looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man
 on the Lord's body.[12]

 And Sela the brahman
 saw all the thirty-two marks of a Great Man
 on the Lord's body
 except two.

 About these two marks of a great man
 he was in doubt,
 perplexed,
 uncertain,
 not satisfied  whether what was cloth-hid was sheath-cased
 and whether the tongue was large.

 Then it occurred to the Lord:

 "This Sela the brahman sees on me
 all the thirty-two marks of a Great Man
 except two.

 About these two marks of a Great Man
 he is in doubt,
 perplexed,
 uncertain,
 not satisfied:
 whether what is cloth-hid is sheath-cased
 and whether my tongue is large."

 Then the Lord contrived such a contrivance of psychic power
 that Sela the brahman saw
 that that which the Lord had cloth-hid was sheath-cased.

 Then the Lord,
 having put out his tongue,
 stroked it backwards and forwards
 over both his ears
 and he stroked it backwards and forwards
 over both his nostrils
 and he covered the whole dome of his forehead
 with his tongue.

 Then it occurred to Sela the brahman:

 "The Lord is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man in full,
 not partially,
 but yet I do not know
 whether he is an Awakened One or not.

 All the same,
 I have heard it said
 by aged brahmans,
 full of years,
 teachers of teachers:
 'When their own praises are being spoken,
 those that are perfected ones,
 fully Self-Awakened Ones
 reveal the self.[13]

 Suppose [336] that I,
 face to face with the recluse Gotama
 were to praise him in suitable verses?"

 Then Sela the brahman,
 face to face with the Lord,
 praised him in suitable verses:

 Sela

 "Your[14] body is complete,[15] gleaming, finely proportioned,[16] beautiful to behold;
 you are the colour of gold, the Lord; lustrous your teeth, you are heroic.
 Indeed those distinguishing signs of a finely proportioned man  all these marks of a Great Man are on your body.
 Your eyes are clear, the face is full,[17] you are well grown,[18] straight, splendid;
 in the midst of an Order of recluses you shine like the sun.
 Lovely to see is a monk with a golden coloured skin;
 but for this recluseship what use is such supremacy of colour?[19]
 You should be a king, a wheel-turner, a bull of charioteers,[20]
 victor over the whole world, chief of the Rose-apple Grove.[21]
 Nobles and wealthy kings will be your vassals;
 you are king of kings, the lord of men; rule, 0 Gotama."

 [337] Gotama

 "I am a king, Sela,
 a matchless king under dhamma;
 I turn the wheel by dhamma,[22]
 the wheel that cannot be turned back."
 Sela

 "Self-Awakened do you profess to be,
 'A matchless king under dhamma;
 I turn the wheel by dhamma' - thus, Gotama, you speak.
 But who is the revered one's captain,
 the disciple second to the Teacher?
 Who turns on this wheel of dhamma
 That was set turning by you?"

 Gotama

 "The wheel set turning by me, Sela,
 The matchless wheel of dhamma  Sāriputta[23] turns it on;
 he is heir born[24] to the Tathāgata.
 What is to be known is known by me,
 and to be developed developed is,
 what is to be got rid of has been got rid of  therefore, brahman, am I Awake.[25]
 Dispel your doubt in me, have faith, brahman.
 Ever difficult to come by is the sight of Self-Awakened Ones.
 Ever difficult to come by is their appearance in the world.
 But I, brahman, am Self-Awakened, a physician without peer,
 Brahma-become, without compare, crushing Māra's hosts;
 having mastered all foes I rejoice, with no fear from anywhere."

 [338] Sela

 "Attend to this, good sirs. As speaks the Visioned One,
 physician, great hero, so roars the forest-lion.
 Seeing him, Brahma-become, without compare, crushing Māra's hosts,
 who should not have faith - even a base-born black?
 Who wishes, let him follow me; or, who wishes it not, let him depart;
 but I will go forth here under Him of Excellent Wisdom."
 Brahmans

 "If this teaching of the fully Self-Awakened One is agreeable to your reverence,
 we too will go forth under Him of Excellent Wisdom."

 Sela

 "These three hundred brahmans, their palms joined in salutation, are asking
 to fare the Brahma-faring under you, 0 Lord."

 Gotama

 "Well taught[26] is the Brahma-faring, Sela,
 It is self-realised, it is timeless.
 The going forth in it is nothing vain for him who trains diligently."

 Sela the brahman and his company
 received the going forth under the Lord,
 they received ordination.

 Then towards the end of that night,
 Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic,
 having had sumptuous foods,
 solid and soft,
 prepared in his own hermitage,
 had the time announced to the Lord,
 saying:

 "It is time, good Gotama,
 the meal is ready."

 Then the Lord,
 dressing in the morning,
 taking his bowl and robe,
 approached the hermitage
 of the matted hair ascetic Keṇiya;
 having approached,
 he sat down on the appointed seat
 together with the Order of monks.

 Then Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 with his own hand
 served and satisfied the Order of monks
 with the Awakened One at its head
 with sumptuous foods,
 solid and soft.

 When the Lord had eaten
 and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl,
 Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic,
 taking a low seat,
 sat down at a respectful distance.

 As Keṇiya the matted hair ascetic
 was sitting down at a respectful distance,
 the Lord thanked him in these verses:

 "Sacrifice is chief in fire-worship,[27]
 Sāvitrī chief of Vedic metres,

 [339] A king is chief of men,
 The ocean chief of waters.
 The moon is chief of the lamps of night,
 The sun the chief of luminaries,
 For those giving alms, desiring merit,
 The Order is indeed the chief."

 When the Lord had thanked the matted hair ascetic Keṇiya in these verses,
 rising from his seat,
 he departed.

 Then the venerable Sela and his company,
 dwelling alone,
 aloof,
 diligent,
 ardent,
 self-resolute,
 having soon realised here and now
 by their own super-knowledge
 that matchless goal of the Brahma-faring
 for the sake of which young men of family
 rightly go forth from home
 into homelessness,
 entering on it
 abided therein;
 and they knew:

 "Destroyed is birth,
 brought to a close the Brahma-faring,
 done is what was to be done,
 there is no more of being such or so."

 And the venerable Sela and his company
 became perfected ones.

 Then the venerable Sela and his company
 approached the Lord;
 having approached,
 having arranged his upper robe over one shoulder,
 having saluted the Lord with joined palms,
 he addressed the Lord in verses:[28]

 "Eight days ago, 0 Visioned One, we came to you for refuge;
 Lord, through your teaching we were tamed in seven nights.
 You are the Wake, you the Teacher, you the Seer who is Māra's victor;
 Having cut out latent tendencies, you, crossed over, help this mortality to cross.
 The basis (for rebirth) has been transcended by you, the cankers shattered by you.
 A lion are you, without attachment, who has got rid of fear and dread.
 These three hundred monks are standing with joined palms Stretch forth your feet, 0 Hero, let great beings[29] honour the Teacher."

 Discourse with Sela:
 The Second
