# Linked Discourses on Females

## First Chapter of Abbreviated Texts

### N 37.1 A Female *Mātugāmasutta*

"Mendicants, when a female has five factors she is extremely undesirable
to a man. What five? She's not attractive, wealthy, or ethical; she's
idle, and she doesn't beget children. When a female has these five
factors she is extremely undesirable to a man.

When a female has five factors she is extremely desirable to a man. What
five? She's attractive, wealthy, and ethical; she's deft and tireless,
and she begets children. When a female has these five factors she is
extremely desirable to a man."

### N 37.2 A Man *Purisasutta*

"Mendicants, when a man has five factors he is extremely undesirable to
a female. What five? He's not attractive, wealthy, or ethical; he's
idle, and he doesn't beget children. When a man has these five factors
he is extremely undesirable to a female.

When a man has five factors he is extremely desirable to a female. What
five? He's attractive, wealthy, and ethical; he's deft and tireless, and
he begets children. When a man has these five factors he is extremely
desirable to a female."

### N 37.3 Particular Suffering *Āveṇikadukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering that particularly
apply to females. They're undergone by females and not by men. What
five?

Firstly, a female, while still young, goes to live with her husband's
family and is separated from her relatives. This is the first kind of
suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female undergoes the menstrual cycle. This is the second
kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female undergoes pregnancy. This is the third kind of
suffering that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female gives birth. This is the fourth kind of suffering
that particularly applies to females.

Furthermore, a female provides services for a man. This is the fifth
kind of suffering that particularly applies to females.

These are the five kinds of suffering that particularly apply to
females. They're undergone by females and not by men."

### N 37.4 Three Qualities *Tīhidhammehisutta*

"Mendicants, when females have three qualities, when their body breaks
up, after death, they are mostly reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. What three?

A female lives at home with a heart full of the stain of stinginess in
the morning, jealousy in the afternoon, and sexual desire in the
evening.

When females have these three qualities, when their body breaks up,
after death, they are mostly reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell."

### N 37.5 Irritable *Kodhanasutta*

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to the Buddha, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sometimes, sir, with my clairvoyance that's purified and superhuman, I
see that a female---when her body breaks up, after death---is reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. How many qualities
do females have so that they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell?"

"Anuruddha, when females have five qualities, when their body breaks up,
after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. What five?

They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, irritable, and witless.

When females have these five qualities, when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell."

### N 37.6 Acrimony *Upanāhīsutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, acrimonious, and witless.
..."

### N 37.7 Jealous *Issukīsutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, jealous, and witless. ..."

### N 37.8 Stingy *Maccharīsutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, stingy, and witless. ..."

### N 37.9 Adultery *Aticārīsutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, adulterous, and witless.
..."

### N 37.10 Unethical *Dussīlasutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, unethical, and witless.
..."

### N 37.11 Unlearned *Appassutasutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, and witless.
..."

### N 37.12 Lazy *Kusītasutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. ..."

### N 37.13 Unmindful *Muṭṭhassatisutta*

"... They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, unmindful, and witless.
..."

### N 37.14 Five Threats *Pañcaverasutta*

"Anuruddha, when females have five qualities, when their body breaks up,
after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit
sexual misconduct, lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.
When females have these five qualities, when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell."

## Second Chapter of Abbreviated Texts

### N 37.15 Loving *Akkodhanasutta*

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to the Buddha ... and asked him,
"Sometimes, sir, with my clairvoyance that's purified and superhuman, I
see that a female---when her body breaks up, after death---is reborn in
a good place, a heavenly realm. How many qualities do females have so
that they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Anuruddha, when females have five qualities, when their body breaks up,
after death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. What
five? They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, loving, and wise. When
females have these five qualities, when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

### N 37.16 Free of Acrimony *Anupanāhīsutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, free of acrimony, and
wise. ..."

### N 37.17 Free of Jealousy *Anissukīsutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, free of jealousy, and
wise. ..."

### N 37.18 Free of Stinginess *Amaccharīsutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, free of stinginess, and
wise. ..."

### N 37.19 Not Adulterous *Anaticārīsutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, not adulterous, and wise.
..."

### N 37.20 Ethical *Susīlasutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, ethical, and wise. ..."

### N 37.21 Very Learned *Bahussutasutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, and wise. ..."

### N 37.22 Energetic *Āraddhavīriyasutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. ..."

### N 37.23 Mindful *Upaṭṭhitassatisutta*

"... They're faithful, conscientious, prudent, mindful, and wise. ..."

### N 37.24 Five Precepts *Pañcasīlasutta*

"Anuruddha, when females have five qualities, when their body breaks up,
after death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. What
five? They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. When females have
these five qualities, when their body breaks up, after death, they are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

## The Chapter on Powers

### N 37.25 Assured *Visāradasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?
Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior. These
are the five powers of a female. A female living at home with these five
qualities is self-assured."

### N 37.26 Under Her Thumb *Pasayhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?
Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior. These
are the five powers of a female. A female living at home with these five
powers has her husband under her thumb."

### N 37.27 Mastered *Abhibhuyyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?
Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior. These
are the five powers of a female. A female with these five powers lives
having mastered her husband."

### N 37.28 One *Ekasutta*

"Mendicants, when a man has one power he has a female under his mastery.
What one power? The power of authority. Mastered by this, a female's
powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical
behavior do not avail her."

### N 37.29 In That Respect *Aṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?

Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.

A female who has the power of attractiveness but not the power of wealth
is incomplete in that respect. But when she has the power of
attractiveness and the power of wealth she's complete in that respect.

A female who has the powers of attractiveness and wealth, but not the
power of relatives is incomplete in that respect. But when she has the
powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives she's complete in that
respect.

A female who has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives,
but not the power of children is incomplete in that respect. But when
she has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and children
she's complete in that respect.

A female who has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and
children, but not the power of ethical behavior is incomplete in that
respect. But when she has the powers of attractiveness, wealth,
relatives, children, and ethical behavior she's complete in that
respect.

These are the five powers of a female."

### N 37.30 They Send Her Away *Nāsentisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?

Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.

If a female has the power of attractiveness but not that of ethical
behavior, the family will send her away, they won't accommodate her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness and wealth but not that of
ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won't accommodate
her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, and relatives, but
not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her away, they won't
accommodate her.

If a female has the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, and
children, but not that of ethical behavior, the family will send her
away, they won't accommodate her.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of
attractiveness, the family will accommodate her, they won't send her
away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of wealth,
the family will accommodate her, they won't send her away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of relatives,
the family will accommodate her, they won't send her away.

If a female has the power of ethical behavior but not that of children,
the family will accommodate her, they won't send her away.

These are the five powers of a female."

### N 37.31 Cause *Hetusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a female. What five?
Attractiveness, wealth, relatives, children, and ethical behavior.

It is not because of the powers of attractiveness, wealth, relatives, or
children that females, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It is because of the power of
ethical behavior that females, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

These are the five powers of a female."

### N 37.32 Things *Ṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five things that are hard to get for females who
have not made merit. What five?

'May I be born into a suitable family!' This is the first thing.

'Having been born in a suitable family, may I marry into a suitable
family!' This is the second thing.

'Having been born in a suitable family and married into a suitable
family, may I live at home without a co-wife!' This is the third thing.

'Having been born in a suitable family, and married into a suitable
family, and living at home without a co-wife, may I have children!' This
is the fourth thing.

'Having been born in a suitable family, and married into a suitable
family, and living at home without a co-wife, and having had children,
may I live having mastered my husband!' This is the fifth thing.

These are the five things that are hard to get for females who have not
made merit.

There are five things that are easy to get for females who have made
merit. What five?

'May I be born into a suitable family!' This is the first thing.

'Having been born into a suitable family, may I marry into a suitable
family!' This is the second thing.

'Having been born into a suitable family and married into a suitable
family, may I live at home without a co-wife!' This is the third thing.

'Having been born into a suitable family, and married into a suitable
family, and living at home without a co-wife, may I have children!' This
is the fourth thing.

'Having been born into a suitable family, and married into a suitable
family, and living at home without a co-wife, and having had children,
may I live having mastered my husband!' This is the fifth thing.

These are the five things that are easy to get for females who have made
merit."

### N 37.33 Living With Self-Assurance *Pañcasīlavisāradasutta*

"Mendicants, a female living at home with five qualities is
self-assured. What five? She doesn't kill living creatures, steal,
commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. A female living at home with these five qualities is
self-assured."

### N 37.34 Growth *Vaḍḍhīsutta*

"Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? She
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A female noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> When she grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> takes on what is essential for herself in this life."



