::::::::::: center
::: large
:::

::: normalsize
*translated and introduced by*
:::

::: LARGE
[Bhikkhu Sujato]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: normalsize
DN 14--23
:::

::: Large
[The Great Chapter]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: large
[SuttaCentral]{.smallcaps}
:::
:::::::::::

:::: footnotesize
*Long Discourses* is a translation of the Dīghanikāya by Bhikkhu Sujato.

Creative Commons Zero (CC0)

To the extent possible under law, Bhikkhu Sujato has waived all
copyright and related or neighboring rights to *Long Discourses*.

This work is published from Australia.

::: center
*This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.*
:::

Web publication date

:   2018

This edition

:   2025-01-27 00:57:58

Publication type

:   paperback

Edition

:   ed5

Number of volumes

:   3

Publication ISBN

:   978-1-76132-052-1

Volume ISBN

:   978-1-76132-095-8

Publication URL

:   <https://suttacentral.net/editions/dn/en/sujato>

Source URL

:   <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn>

Publication number

:   scpub2

Map of Jambudīpa is by Jonas David Mitja Lang, and is released by him
under Creative Commons Zero (CC0).

Published by SuttaCentral

*SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia*
::::

## Summary of Contents {#summary-of-contents .unnumbered}

The Great Chapter (*[Mahāvagga]{lang="sa"}*)

:   This chapter contains a diverse range of discourses. Several focus
    on the events surrounding the Buddha's death, while others range
    into fabulous scenarios set among the gods, and still others are
    grounded in detailed discussions of doctrine.

DN 14: The Great Discourse on Traces Left Behind (*[Mahāpadānasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   The Buddha teaches about the six Buddhas of the past, and tells a
    lengthy account of one of those, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}.

DN 15: The Great Discourse on Causation (*[Mahānidānasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Rejecting Venerable Ānanda's claim to easily understand dependent
    origination, the Buddha presents a complex and demanding analysis,
    revealing hidden nuances and implications of this central teaching.

DN 16: The Great Discourse on the Buddha's Extinguishment (*[Mahāparinibbānasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   The longest of all discourses, this extended narrative tells of the
    events surrounding the Buddha's death. Full of vivid and moving
    details, it is an ideal entry point into knowing the Buddha as a
    person, and understanding how the Buddhist community coped with his
    passing.

DN 17: King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} (*[Mahāsudassanasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   An elaborate story of a past life of the Buddha as a legendary king
    who renounced all to practice meditation.

DN 18: With Janavasabha (*[Janavasabhasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Beginning with an account of the fates of disciples who had recently
    passed away, the scene shifts to a discussion of Dhamma held by the
    gods.

DN 19: The Great Steward (*[Mahāgovindasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   A minor deity informs the Buddha of the conversations and business
    of the gods.

DN 20: The Great Congregation (*[Mahāsamayasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   When deities from all realms gather in homage to the Buddha, he
    gives a series of verses describing them. These verses, which are
    commonly chanted in Theravadin countries, give one of the most
    detailed descriptions of the deities worshiped at the the time of
    the Buddha.

DN 21: Sakka's Questions (*[Sakkapañhasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   After hearing a love song from a god of music, the Buddha engages in
    a deep discussion with Sakka on the conditioned origin of attachment
    and suffering.

DN 22: The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation (*[Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   The Buddha details the seventh factor of the noble eightfold path,
    mindfulness meditation. This discourse is essentially identical to
    MN 10, with the addition of an extended section on the four noble
    truths derived from MN 141.

DN 23: With [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} (*[Pāyāsisutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   This is a long and entertaining debate between a monk and a skeptic,
    who went to elaborate and bizarre lengths to prove that there is no
    such thing as an afterlife. The discourse contains a colorful series
    of parables and examples.

# The Great Chapter  {#the-great-chapter .unnumbered}

## N 14 The Great Discourse on Traces Left Behind  *Mahāpadānasutta* {#n-14-the-great-discourse-on-traces-left-behind-mahāpadānasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. On Past Lives  {#on-past-lives .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^1]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery, in the hut by the kareri tree.[^2]

Then after the meal, on return from almsround, several mendicants sat
together in the pavilion by the kareri tree and this Dhamma talk on the
subject of past lives came up among them, "So it was in a past life;
such it was in a past life."[^3]

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
that discussion among the mendicants. So he got up from his seat and
went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed
the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking about just
now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, "This is the
conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"Would you like to hear a Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
give a Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives. The mendicants will
listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ninety-one eons ago, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} arose in the
world, perfected and fully awakened.[^4] Thirty-one eons ago, the Buddha
[Sikhī]{lang="sa"} arose in the world, perfected and fully awakened.[^5]
In the same thirty-first eon, the Buddha [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} arose in
the world, perfected and fully awakened.[^6] In the present fortunate
eon, the Buddhas Kakusandha,[^7] [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"},[^8] and
Kassapa arose in the world, perfected and fully awakened.[^9] And in the
present fortunate eon, I have arisen in the world, perfected and fully
awakened.[^10]

The Buddhas [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, [Sikhī]{lang="sa"}, and
[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} were born as aristocrats into aristocrat families.
The Buddhas Kakusandha, [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}, and Kassapa were born
as brahmins into brahmin families. I was born as an aristocrat into an
aristocrat family.[^11]

[Koṇḍañña]{lang="sa"} was the clan of [Vipassī]{lang="sa"},[^12]
[Sikhī]{lang="sa"}, and [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}. Kassapa was the clan of
Kakusandha, [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}, and Kassapa. Gotama is my
clan.[^13]

For [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the lifespan was 80,000 years. For
[Sikhī]{lang="sa"}, the lifespan was 70,000 years. For
[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}, the lifespan was 60,000 years. For Kakusandha,
the lifespan was 40,000 years. For [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}, the lifespan
was 30,000 years. For Kassapa, the lifespan was 20,000 years. For me at
this time the lifespan is short, brief, and fleeting. A long-lived
person lives for a century or a little more.

[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} was awakened at the root of a patala tree.[^14]
[Sikhī]{lang="sa"} was awakened at the root of a white-mango tree.[^15]
[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} was awakened at the root of a sal tree.[^16]
Kakusandha was awakened at the root of a sirisa tree.[^17]
[Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"} was awakened at the root of a cluster fig
tree.[^18] Kassapa was awakened at the root of a banyan tree.[^19] I was
awakened at the root of a peepal tree.[^20]

[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had a fine pair of chief disciples named
[Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and Tissa. [Sikhī]{lang="sa"} had a fine pair of
chief disciples named [Abhibhū]{lang="sa"} and Sambhava.
[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} had a fine pair of chief disciples named
[Soṇa]{lang="sa"} and Uttara. Kakusandha had a fine pair of chief
disciples named Vidhura and [Sañjīva]{lang="sa"}.
[Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"} had a fine pair of chief disciples named
Bhiyyosa and Uttara. Kassapa had a fine pair of chief disciples named
Tissa and [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"}. I have a fine pair of chief disciples
named [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}.

[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had three gatherings of disciples---one of
6,800,000, one of 100,000, and one of 80,000---all of them mendicants
who had ended their defilements.[^21]

[Sikhī]{lang="sa"} had three gatherings of disciples---one of 100,000,
one of 80,000, and one of 70,000---all of them mendicants who had ended
their defilements.

[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} had three gatherings of disciples---one of 80,000,
one of 70,000, and one of 60,000---all of them mendicants who had ended
their defilements.

Kakusandha had one gathering of disciples---40,000 mendicants who had
ended their defilements.

[Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"} had one gathering of disciples---30,000
mendicants who had ended their defilements.

Kassapa had one gathering of disciples---20,000 mendicants who had ended
their defilements.

I have had one gathering of disciples---1,250 mendicants who had ended
their defilements.[^22]

[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had as chief attendant a mendicant named Asoka.
[Sikhī]{lang="sa"} had as chief attendant a mendicant named
[Khemaṅkara]{lang="sa"}. [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} had as chief attendant a
mendicant named Upasanta. Kakusandha had as chief attendant a mendicant
named Buddhija. [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"} had as chief attendant a
mendicant named Sotthija. Kassapa had as chief attendant a mendicant
named Sabbamitta. I have as chief attendant a mendicant named Ānanda.

[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s father was King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"}, his birth
mother was Queen [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}, and their capital city was
named [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}.

[Sikhī]{lang="sa"}'s father was King [Aruṇa]{lang="sa"},[^23] his birth
mother was Queen [Pabhāvatī]{lang="sa"},[^24] and their capital city was
named [Aruṇavatī]{lang="sa"}.[^25]

[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}'s father was King Suppatita,[^26] his birth mother
was Queen [Vassavatī]{lang="sa"}, and their capital city was named
Anoma.

Kakusandha's father was the brahmin Aggidatta,[^27] and his birth mother
was the brahmin lady [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}.[^28] At that time the king
was Khema, whose capital city was named [Khemavatī]{lang="sa"}.[^29]

[Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}'s father was the brahmin
[Yaññadatta]{lang="sa"},[^30] and his birth mother was the brahmin lady
[Uttarā]{lang="sa"}.[^31] At that time the king was Sobha, whose capital
city was named [Sobhavatī]{lang="sa"}.[^32]

Kassapa's father was the brahmin Brahmadatta,[^33] and his birth mother
was the brahmin lady [Dhanavatī]{lang="sa"}.[^34] At that time the king
was [Kikī]{lang="sa"},[^35] whose capital city was named Varanasi.

In this life, my father was King Suddhodana,[^36] my birth mother was
Queen [Māyā]{lang="sa"},[^37] and our capital city was Kapilavatthu."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants discussed among themselves:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! The Realized One has such
psychic power and might! For he is able to recollect the birth, names,
clans, lifespan, chief disciples, and gatherings of disciples of the
Buddhas of the past who have become fully quenched, cut off
proliferation, cut off the track, finished off the cycle, and
transcended all suffering. He knows their birth, names, clans, conduct,
qualities, wisdom, meditation, and freedom.

Is it because the Realized One has clearly comprehended the principle of
the teachings that he can recollect all these things?[^38] Or did
deities tell him?" But this conversation among those mendicants was left
unfinished.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the pavilion by the kareri tree, where he sat on the seat spread out and
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants, what were you sitting talking
about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

The mendicants told him what had happened, adding, "This was our
conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"It is because the Realized One has clearly comprehended the principle
of the teachings that he can recollect all these things. And the deities
also told me.

Would you like to hear a further Dhamma talk on the subject of past
lives?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
give a further Dhamma talk on the subject of past lives. The mendicants
will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ninety-one eons ago, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} arose in the
world, perfected and fully awakened. He was born as an aristocrat into
an aristocrat family. His clan was [Koṇḍañña]{lang="sa"}. He lived for
80,000 years. He was awakened at the root of a patala tree. He had a
fine pair of chief disciples named [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and Tissa. He had
three gatherings of disciples---one of 6,800,000, one of 100,000, and
one of 80,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their defilements.
He had as chief attendant a mendicant named Asoka. His father was King
[Bandhumā]{lang="sa"}, his birth mother was Queen
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}, and their capital city was named
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}.

### 2. What's Normal For One Intent on Awakening  {#whats-normal-for-one-intent-on-awakening .unnumbered}

When [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the being intent on awakening, passed away
from the host of joyful gods, he was conceived in his mother's womb,
mindful and aware.[^39] This is normal in such a case.[^40]

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening passes away from
the host of joyful gods, he is conceived in his mother's womb. And
then---in this world with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---an
immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the glory of the
gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so utterly dark
that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful,
makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears,
surpassing the glory of the gods.[^41] And the sentient beings reborn
there recognize each other by that light: 'So, it seems other sentient
beings have been reborn here!'[^42] And this ten-thousandfold galaxy
shakes and rocks and trembles. And an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears in the world, surpassing the glory of the gods. This is normal
in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, four gods approach to guard the four quarters, so that
no human or non-human or anyone at all shall harm the being intent on
awakening or his mother.[^43] This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she becomes naturally ethical. She refrains from killing
living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and beer, wine,
and liquor intoxicants.[^44] This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she no longer feels sexual desire for men, and she
cannot be violated by a man of lustful intent. This is normal in such a
case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, she obtains the five kinds of sensual stimulation and
amuses herself, supplied and provided with them.[^45] This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, no afflictions beset her. She's happy and free of bodily
fatigue. And she sees the being intent on awakening in her womb, whole
in his major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. Suppose
there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted,
well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good
qualities. And it was strung with a thread of blue, yellow, red, white,
or golden brown. And someone with clear eyes were to take it in their
hand and examine it: 'This beryl gem is naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it's strung with a thread of blue, yellow,
red, white, or golden brown.'

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening is conceived in his
mother's belly, no afflictions beset her. She's happy and free of bodily
fatigue. And she sees the being intent on awakening in her womb, whole
in his major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty. This is
normal in such a case.

It's normal that, seven days after the being intent on awakening is
born, his mother passes away and is reborn in the host of joyful
gods.[^46] This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, while other women carry the infant in the womb for
nine or ten months before giving birth, not so the mother of the being
intent on awakening. She gives birth after exactly ten months.[^47] This
is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, while other women give birth while sitting or lying
down, not so the mother of the being intent on awakening. She only gives
birth standing up.[^48] This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, gods receive him first, then humans. This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, before he reaches the ground, four gods receive him and
place him before his mother, saying: 'Rejoice, O Queen! An illustrious
son is born to you.' This is normal in such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, he emerges already clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus,
blood, or any other kind of impurity, pure and clean. Suppose a
jewel-treasure was placed on a cloth from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}. The jewel
would not soil the cloth, nor would the cloth soil the jewel.[^49] Why
is that? Because of the cleanliness of them both.

In the same way, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, he emerges already clean, unsoiled by waters, mucus,
blood, or any other kind of impurity, pure and clean. This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, two showers of water appear from the sky, one cool, one
warm, for bathing the being intent on awakening and his mother. This is
normal in such a case.

It's normal that, as soon as he's born, the being intent on awakening
stands firm with his own feet on the ground. Facing north, he takes
seven strides with a white parasol held above him, surveys all quarters,
and makes this dramatic proclamation: 'I am the foremost in the world! I
am the eldest in the world! I am the first in the world! This is my last
rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'[^50] This is normal in
such a case.

It's normal that, when the being intent on awakening emerges from his
mother's womb, then---in this world with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"},
and divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the
glory of the gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so
utterly dark that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and
powerful, makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears, surpassing the glory of the gods. And the sentient beings
reborn there recognize each other by that light: 'So, it seems other
sentient beings have been reborn here!' And this ten-thousandfold galaxy
shakes and rocks and trembles. And an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears in the world, surpassing the glory of the gods. This is normal
in such a case.

### 3. The Thirty-Two Marks of a Great Man  {#the-thirty-two-marks-of-a-great-man .unnumbered}

When Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} was born, they announced it to King
[Bandhumā]{lang="sa"},[^51] 'Sire, your son is born! Let your majesty
examine him!' When the king had examined the prince, he had the brahmin
soothsayers summoned and said to them,[^52] 'Gentlemen, please examine
the prince.' When they had examined him they said to the king, 'Rejoice,
O King! An illustrious son is born to you. You are fortunate, so very
fortunate, to have a son such as this born in this family! For the
prince has the thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who
possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other.[^53] If he
stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and
principled king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves
stability in the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. He has
the following seven treasures:[^54] the wheel, the elephant, the horse,
the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh
treasure. He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigns by principle, without rod or sword. But if he goes forth
from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world.

And what are the marks which he possesses?[^55]

He has well-planted feet.[^56]

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and
hubs, complete in every detail.[^57]

He has stretched heels.[^58]

He has long fingers.[^59]

His hands and feet are tender.[^60]

He has serried hands and feet.[^61]

The tops of his feet are arched.[^62]

His calves are like those of an antelope.[^63]

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands
touch the knees.[^64]

His private parts are covered in a foreskin.[^65]

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous gold.[^66]

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.[^67]

His hairs grow one per pore.[^68]

His hairs stand up; they're blue-black and curl clockwise.[^69]

His body is tall and straight-limbed.[^70]

He has bulging muscles in seven places.[^71]

His chest is like that of a lion.[^72]

He is filled out between the shoulders.[^73]

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his
arms equals the height of his body.[^74]

His torso is cylindrical.

He has ridged taste buds.[^75]

His jaw is like that of a lion.

He has forty teeth.

His teeth are even.[^76]

His teeth have no gaps.

His teeth are perfectly white.

He has a large tongue.[^77]

He has the voice of the Divinity, like a cuckoo's call.

His eyes are indigo.[^78]

He has eyelashes like a cow's.[^79]

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like
cotton-wool.

The crown of his head is like a turban.[^80]

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man that the prince has. A
great man who possesses these has only two possible destinies, no other.
If he stays at home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch. But if
he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world.'

### 4. How He Came to be Known as [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}  {#how-he-came-to-be-known-as-vipassī .unnumbered}

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} had the brahmin soothsayers dressed in
unworn clothes and satisfied all their needs.[^81] Then the king
appointed nursemaids for Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}.[^82] Some suckled
him, some bathed him, some held him, and some carried him on their hip.
From when he was born, a white parasol was held over him night and day,
with the thought, 'Don't let cold, heat, grass, dust, or damp bother
him.' He was dear and beloved by many people, like a blue water lily, or
a pink or white lotus. He was always passed from hip to hip.

From when he was born, his voice was charming, graceful, sweet, and
lovely. It was as sweet as the song of a cuckoo-bird found in the
Himalayas.

From when he was born, Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had the power of
clairvoyance which manifested as a result of past deeds, by which he
could see for a league all around both by day and by night.[^83]

And he was unblinkingly watchful, like the gods of the thirty-three. And
because it was said that he was unblinkingly watchful, he came to be
known as '[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'.[^84]

Then while King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} was sitting in judgment, he'd sit
Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} in his lap and explain the case to him. And
sitting there in his father's lap, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} would thoroughly
consider the case and draw a conclusion using a logical procedure. So
this was all the more reason for him to be known as
'[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'.[^85]

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} had three stilt longhouses built for
him---one for the winter, one for the summer, and one for the rainy
season, and provided him with the five kinds of sensual stimulation.
Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} stayed in a stilt longhouse without coming
downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where he was
entertained by musicians---none of them men.

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 5. The Old Man  {#the-old-man .unnumbered}

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} addressed his charioteer,[^86] 'My
dear charioteer, harness the finest chariots. We will go to a park and
see the scenery.'

'Yes, sir,' replied the charioteer. He harnessed the chariots and
informed the prince, 'Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please go
at your convenience.' Then Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} mounted a fine
carriage and, along with other fine carriages, set out for the park.

Along the way he saw an elderly man, bent double, crooked, leaning on a
staff, trembling as he walked, ailing, past his prime. He addressed his
charioteer, 'My dear charioteer, what has that man done? For his hair
and his body are unlike those of other men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called an old man.'

'But why is he called an old man?'

'He's called an old man because now he has not long to live.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to grow old? Am I not exempt from
old age?'

'Everyone is liable to grow old, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from old age.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal compound.'[^87]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and sad:[^88]
'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old age will come to anyone
who's born.'

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} summoned the charioteer and said, 'My
dear charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope
he was happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the old man and the prince's reaction.

### 6. The Sick Man  {#the-sick-man .unnumbered}

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
must not renounce the throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. And the words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come
true.'[^89] To this end he provided the prince with even more of the
five kinds of sensual stimulation, with which the prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
had his charioteer drive him to the park once more.[^90]

Along the way he saw a man who was sick, suffering, gravely ill,
collapsed in his own urine and feces, being picked up by some and put
down by others. He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear charioteer, what
has that man done? For his eyes and his voice are unlike those of other
men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called a sick man.'

'But why is he called a sick man?'

'He's called a sick man; hopefully he will recover from that illness.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to fall sick? Am I not exempt from
sickness?'

'Everyone is liable to fall sick, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from sickness.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal compound.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and sad:
'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old age and sickness will come
to anyone who's born.'

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} summoned the charioteer and said, 'My
dear charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope
he was happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the sick man and the prince's reaction.

### 7. The Dead Man  {#the-dead-man .unnumbered}

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
must not renounce the throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. And the words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come
true.' To this end he provided the prince with even more of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation, with which the prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
had his charioteer drive him to the park once more.

Along the way he saw a large crowd gathered making a bier out of
garments of different colors.[^91] He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear
charioteer, why is that crowd making a bier?'

'That, Your Majesty, is for someone who's departed.'

'Well then, drive the chariot up to the departed.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer, and did so.

When the prince saw the corpse of the departed, he addressed the
charioteer, 'But why is he called departed?'

'He's called departed because now his mother and father, his relatives
and kin shall see him no more, and he shall never again see them.'

'But my dear charioteer, am I liable to die? Am I not exempt from death?
Will the king and queen and my other relatives and kin see me no more?
And shall I never again see them?'

'Everyone is liable to die, Your Majesty, including you. No-one is
exempt from death. The king and queen and your other relatives and kin
shall see you no more, and you shall never again see them.'

'Well then, my dear charioteer, that's enough of the park for today.
Let's return to the royal compound.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Back at the royal compound, the prince brooded, miserable and sad:
'Curse this thing called rebirth, since old age, sickness, and death
will come to anyone who's born.'

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} summoned the charioteer and said, 'My
dear charioteer, I hope the prince enjoyed himself at the park? I hope
he was happy there?'

'No, Your Majesty, the prince didn't enjoy himself at the park.'

'But what did he see on the way to the park?' And the charioteer told
the king about seeing the dead man and the prince's reaction.

### 8. The Renunciate  {#the-renunciate .unnumbered}

Then King [Bandhumā]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
must not renounce the throne. He must not go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. And the words of the brahmin soothsayers must not come
true.' To this end he provided the prince with even more of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation, with which the prince amused himself.

Then, after many thousand years had passed, Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
had his charioteer drive him to the park once more.

Along the way he saw a man, a renunciate with shaven head, wearing an
ocher robe.[^92] He addressed his charioteer, 'My dear charioteer, what
has that man done? For his head and his clothes are unlike those of
other men.'

'That, Your Majesty, is called a renunciate.'

'But why is he called a renunciate?'

'He is called a renunciate because he celebrates principled and fair
conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and sympathy for
living creatures.'[^93]

'Then I celebrate the one called a renunciate, who celebrates principled
and fair conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and
sympathy for living creatures! Well then, drive the chariot up to that
renunciate.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer, and did so.

Then Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} said to that renunciate, 'My good man,
what have you done? For your head and your clothes are unlike those of
other men.'

'Sire, I am what is called a renunciate.'

'But why are you called a renunciate?'

'I am called a renunciate because I celebrate principled and fair
conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and sympathy for
living creatures.'

'Then I celebrate the one called a renunciate, who celebrates principled
and fair conduct, skillful actions, good deeds, harmlessness, and
sympathy for living creatures!'

### 9. The Going Forth  {#the-going-forth .unnumbered}

Then the prince addressed the charioteer, 'Well then, my dear
charioteer, take the chariot and return to the royal compound. I shall
shave off my hair and beard right here, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.'[^94]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the charioteer and did so.

Then Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} shaved off his hair and beard, dressed
in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

### 10. A Great Crowd Goes Forth  {#a-great-crowd-goes-forth .unnumbered}

A large crowd of 84,000 people in the capital of [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}
heard that [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had gone forth. It occurred to them,
'This must be no ordinary teaching and training, no ordinary going forth
in which Prince [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} has gone forth. If even the prince
goes forth, why don't we do the same?'

Then that great crowd of 84,000 people shaved off their hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and followed the one intent on awakening,
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, by going forth from the lay life to
homelessness.[^95] Escorted by that assembly, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
wandered on tour among the villages, towns, and capital cities.[^96]

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, 'It's
not appropriate for me to live in a crowd. Why don't I live alone,
withdrawn from the group?' After some time he withdrew from the group to
live alone. The 84,000 went one way, but [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} went
another.

### 11. [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s Reflections  {#vipassīs-reflections .unnumbered}

Then as [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the one intent on awakening, was in
private retreat in his dwelling, this thought came to his mind,[^97]
'Alas, this world has fallen into trouble. It's born, grows old, dies,
passes away, and is reborn, yet it doesn't understand how to escape from
this suffering, from old age and death.[^98] Oh, when will an escape be
found from this suffering, from old age and death?'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there old age
and death? What is a condition for old age and death?'[^99] Then,
through rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended
with wisdom,[^100] 'When rebirth exists there's old age and death.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death.'[^101]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there rebirth?
What is a condition for rebirth?'[^102] Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When continued existence exists there's rebirth. Continued existence is
a condition for rebirth.'[^103]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there continued
existence? What is a condition for continued existence?' Then, through
rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with
wisdom, 'When grasping exists there's continued existence. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence.'[^104]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there grasping?
What is a condition for grasping?' Then, through rational application of
mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom, 'When craving
exists there's grasping. Craving is a condition for grasping.'[^105]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there craving?
What is a condition for craving?' Then, through rational application of
mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom, 'When feeling
exists there's craving. Feeling is a condition for craving.'[^106]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there feeling?
What is a condition for feeling?' Then, through rational application of
mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom, 'When contact
exists there's feeling. Contact is a condition for feeling.'[^107]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there contact?
What is a condition for contact?' Then, through rational application of
mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom, 'When the six sense
fields exist there's contact. The six sense fields are a condition for
contact.'[^108]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists are there the six
sense fields? What is a condition for the six sense fields?' Then,
through rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended
with wisdom, 'When name and form exist there are the six sense fields.
Name and form are a condition for the six sense fields.'[^109]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists are there name and
form? What is a condition for name and form?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When consciousness exists there are name and form. Consciousness is a
condition for name and form.'[^110]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what exists is there
consciousness? What is a condition for consciousness?' Then, through
rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with
wisdom, 'When name and form exist there's consciousness. Name and form
are a condition for consciousness.'[^111]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'This consciousness turns back from
name and form, and doesn't go beyond that.'[^112] It is to this extent
that one may be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear. That is:
Name and form are conditions for consciousness. Consciousness is a
condition for name and form. Name and form are conditions for the six
sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact. Contact
is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. Craving
is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for continued
existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a
condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress to come to be.[^113] That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.'

'Origination, origination.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom,
realization, and light that arose in [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the one
intent on awakening, regarding teachings not learned before from
another.[^114]

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
old age and death? When what ceases do old age and death cease?' Then,
through rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended
with wisdom, 'When rebirth doesn't exist there's no old age and death.
When rebirth ceases, old age and death cease.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
rebirth? When what ceases does rebirth cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When continued existence doesn't exist there's no rebirth. When
continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
continued existence? When what ceases does continued existence cease?'
Then, through rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
comprehended with wisdom, 'When grasping doesn't exist there's no
continued existence. When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
grasping? When what ceases does grasping cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When craving doesn't exist there's no grasping. When craving ceases,
grasping ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
craving? When what ceases does craving cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When feeling doesn't exist there's no craving. When feeling ceases,
craving ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
feeling? When what ceases does feeling cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When contact doesn't exist there's no feeling. When contact ceases,
feeling ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
contact? When what ceases does contact cease?' Then, through rational
application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with wisdom,
'When the six sense fields don't exist there's no contact. When the six
sense fields cease, contact ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist are there no
six sense fields? When what ceases do the six sense fields cease?' Then,
through rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended
with wisdom, 'When name and form don't exist there are no six sense
fields. When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist are there no
name and form? When what ceases do name and form cease?' Then, through
rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with
wisdom, 'When consciousness doesn't exist there are no name and form.
When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'When what doesn't exist is there no
consciousness? When what ceases does consciousness cease?' Then, through
rational application of mind, [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} comprehended with
wisdom, 'When name and form don't exist there's no consciousness. When
name and form cease, consciousness ceases.'

Then [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} thought, 'I have discovered the path to
awakening. That is:[^115] When name and form cease, consciousness
ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease. When name and
form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense fields cease,
contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling
ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases. When
grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued existence
ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is how this entire
mass of suffering ceases.'

'Cessation, cessation.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom,
realization, and light that arose in [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the one
intent on awakening, regarding teachings not learned before from
another.[^116]

After some time he meditated observing rise and fall in the five
grasping aggregates.[^117] 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such is feeling, such is the origin of
feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the
origin of perception, such is the ending of perception. Such are
choices, such is the origin of choices, such is the ending of
choices.[^118] Such is consciousness, such is the origin of
consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.'[^119] Meditating
like this his mind was soon freed from defilements by not
grasping.[^120]

:::: Center
::: small
*The second recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 12. The Appeal of the Divinity  {#the-appeal-of-the-divinity .unnumbered}

Then the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, thought,[^121] 'Why don't I teach the Dhamma?'[^122]

Then he thought, 'This principle I have discovered is deep, hard to see,
hard to understand, peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic,
subtle, comprehensible to the astute.[^123] But people like clinging,
they love it and enjoy it.[^124] It's hard for them to see this topic;
that is, specific conditionality, dependent origination.[^125] It's also
hard for them to see this topic; that is, the stilling of all
activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving,
fading away, cessation, extinguishment.[^126] And if I were to teach the
Dhamma, others might not understand me, which would be wearying and
troublesome for me.'[^127]

And then these verses, which were neither supernaturally inspired, nor
learned before in the past, occurred to him:[^128]

> 'I've struggled hard to realize this,\
> enough with trying to explain it!\
> Those mired in greed and hate\
> can't really understand this teaching.
>
> It goes against the stream, subtle,\
> deep, obscure, and very fine.\
> Those besotted by greed cannot see,\
> for they're shrouded in a mass of darkness.'[^129]

So, as the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} reflected like this, his mind
inclined to remaining passive, not to teaching the Dhamma.[^130]

Then a certain Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s
train of thought, thought,[^131] 'Alas! The world will be lost, the
world will perish! For the mind of the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"},
the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, inclines to remaining
passive, not to teaching the Dhamma.' Then, as easily as a strong person
would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of
divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}. He
arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee, raised his
joined palms toward the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, and said, 'Sir, let
the Blessed One teach the Dhamma! Let the Holy One teach the
Dhamma![^132] There are beings with little dust in their eyes. They're
in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will be those
who understand the teaching!'[^133]

When he said this, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} said to him, 'I too
thought this, Divinity, "Why don't I teach the Dhamma?" Then it occurred
to me, "If I were to teach the Dhamma, others might not understand me,
which would be wearying and troublesome for me."

So, as I reflected like this, my mind inclined to remaining passive, not
to teaching the Dhamma.'

For a second time, and a third time that Great Divinity begged the
Buddha to teach.

Then, understanding the Divinity's invitation, the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} surveyed the world with the eye of a Buddha, out of
his compassion for sentient beings.[^134] And he saw sentient beings
with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes;
with keen faculties and with weak faculties, with good qualities and
with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach. And some of them
lived seeing the danger in the fault to do with the next world, while
others did not.[^135] It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink
or white lotuses. Some of them sprout and grow in the water without
rising above it, thriving underwater. Some of them sprout and grow in
the water reaching the water's surface. And some of them sprout and grow
in the water but rise up above the water and stand with no water
clinging to them.

In the same way, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} saw sentient beings
with little dust in their eyes, and some with much dust in their eyes.

Then that Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s
train of thought, addressed him in verse:

> 'Standing high on a rocky mountain,\
> you can see the people all around.\
> In just the same way, All-seer, so intelligent,\
> having ascended the Temple of Truth,\
> rid of sorrow, look upon the people\
> swamped with sorrow,\
> \>oppressed by rebirth and old age.
>
> Rise, hero! Victor in battle, leader of the caravan,\
> wander the world free of debt.\
> Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma!\
> There will be those who understand!'

Then the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} addressed that Great Divinity in
verse:

> 'Flung open are the doors to freedom from death!\
> Let those with ears to hear commit to faith.[^136]\
> Thinking it would be troublesome, Divinity,\
> \>I did not teach\
> the sophisticated, sublime Dhamma among humans.'

Then the Great Divinity, knowing that his request for the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} to teach the Dhamma had been granted, bowed and
respectfully circled him, keeping him on his right, before vanishing
right there.

### 13. The Chief Disciples  {#the-chief-disciples .unnumbered}

Then the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, thought, 'Who should I teach first of all? Who will
quickly understand this teaching?' Then he thought, 'That
[Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}, the king's son, and Tissa, the high priest's son,
are astute, competent, clever, and have long had little dust in their
eyes.[^137] Why don't I teach them first of all? They will quickly
understand this teaching.'

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
he vanished from the tree of awakening and reappeared near the capital
city of [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}, in the deer park named Sanctuary.[^138]

Then the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} addressed the park keeper,[^139]
'My dear park keeper, please enter the city and say this to the king's
son [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and the high priest's son Tissa: "Sirs, the
Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, has arrived at [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} and is staying in the
deer park named Sanctuary. He wishes to see you."'

'Yes, sir,' replied the park keeper, and did as he was asked.

Then the king's son [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and the high priest's son Tissa
had the finest carriages harnessed. Then they mounted a fine carriage
and, along with other fine carriages, set out from
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} for the Sanctuary. They went by carriage as far
as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} on foot. They bowed and sat down to one side.

The Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} taught them step by step, with a talk on
giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of
sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of
renunciation. And when he knew that their minds were ready, pliable, rid
of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the special teaching
of the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just
as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very
seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in the king's
son [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and the high priest's son Tissa: 'Everything
that has a beginning has an end.'

They saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. They went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. They said to
the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, 'Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he
were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out
the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with
clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear
in many ways. We go for refuge to the Blessed One and to the teaching.
Sir, may we receive the going forth and ordination in the Buddha's
presence?'

And they received the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s presence.[^140] Then the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired them
with a Dhamma talk. He explained the drawbacks of conditioned phenomena,
so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of extinguishment. Being taught
like this their minds were soon freed from defilements by not
grasping.[^141]

### 14. The Going Forth of the Large Crowd  {#the-going-forth-of-the-large-crowd .unnumbered}

A large crowd of 84,000 people in the capital of [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}
heard that the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha, had arrived at [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} and was
staying in the deer park named Sanctuary. And they heard that the king's
son [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and the high priest's son Tissa had shaved off
their hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness in the Buddha's presence. It occurred to them,
'This must be no ordinary teaching and training, no ordinary going forth
in which the king's son [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and the high priest's son
Tissa have gone forth. If even they go forth, why don't we do the same?'
Then those 84,000 people left [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} for the deer park
named Sanctuary, where they approached the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"},
bowed and sat down to one side.

The Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} taught them step by step, with a talk on
giving, ethical conduct, and heaven. He explained the drawbacks of
sensual pleasures, so sordid and corrupt, and the benefit of
renunciation. And when he knew that their minds were ready, pliable, rid
of hindrances, elated, and confident he explained the special teaching
of the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path. Just
as a clean cloth rid of stains would properly absorb dye, in that very
seat the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in those
84,000 people: 'Everything that has a beginning has an end.'

They saw, attained, understood, and fathomed the Dhamma. They went
beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and became self-assured and
independent of others regarding the Teacher's instructions. They said to
the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, 'Excellent, sir! Excellent!' And just
like [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and Tissa they asked for and received
ordination. Then the Buddha taught them further.

Being taught like this their minds were soon freed from defilements by
not grasping.

### 15. The 84,000 Who Had Gone Forth Previously  {#the-84000-who-had-gone-forth-previously .unnumbered}

The 84,000 people who had gone forth previously also heard: 'It seems
the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, has arrived at [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} and is staying
in the deer park named Sanctuary. And he is teaching the Dhamma!' Then
they too went to see the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, realized the
Dhamma, went forth, and became freed from defilements.

### 16. The Allowance to Wander  {#the-allowance-to-wander .unnumbered}

Now at that time a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of 6,800,000 mendicants
were residing at [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}. As the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"} was in private retreat this thought came to his
mind, 'The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} residing at [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} now
is large. What if I was to urge them:

"Wander forth, mendicants, for the welfare and happiness of the people,
out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans.[^142] Let not two go by one road. Teach the Dhamma
that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And reveal a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. There are beings with little dust in their eyes.
They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will
be those who understand the teaching! But when six years have passed,
you must all come to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic
code."'[^143]

Then a certain Great Divinity, knowing the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s
train of thought, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front
of the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}. He arranged his robe over one
shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha
[Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, and said, 'That's so true, Blessed One! That's so
true, Holy One! The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} residing at
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} now is large. Please urge them to wander, as you
thought. And sir, I'll make sure that when six years have passed the
mendicants will return to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic
code.'

That's what that Great Divinity said. Then he bowed and respectfully
circled the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, keeping him on his right side,
before vanishing right there.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} came out of
retreat and addressed the mendicants, telling them all that had
happened. Then he said,

'Wander forth, mendicants, for the welfare and happiness of the people,
out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans. Let not two go by one road. Teach the Dhamma that's
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And reveal a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. There are beings with little dust in their eyes.
They're in decline because they haven't heard the teaching. There will
be those who understand the teaching! But when six years have passed,
you must all come to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic
code.'

Then most of the mendicants departed to wander the country that very
day.

Now at that time there were 84,000 monasteries in the Black Plum Tree
Land.[^144] And when the first year came to an end the deities raised
the cry: 'Good sirs, the first year has ended. Now five years remain.
When five years have passed, you must all go to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}
to recite the monastic code.'

And when the second year ... the third year ... the fourth year ... the
fifth year came to an end, the deities raised the cry: 'Good sirs, the
fifth year has ended. Now one year remains. When one year has passed,
you must all go to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic code.'

And when the sixth year came to an end the deities raised the cry: 'Good
sirs, the sixth year has ended. Now is the time that you must go to
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic code.' Then that very day
the mendicants went to [Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"} to recite the monastic
code. Some went by their own psychic power, and some by the psychic
power of the deities.

And there the Blessed One [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha, recited the monastic code thus:[^145]

> 'Patient acceptance is the ultimate fervor.[^146]\
> Extinguishment is the ultimate, say the Buddhas.[^147]\
> No true renunciate injures another,\
> nor does an ascetic hurt another.
>
> Not to do any evil;[^148]\
> to embrace the good;[^149]\
> to purify one's mind:[^150]\
> this is the instruction of the Buddhas.[^151]
>
> Not speaking ill nor doing harm;\
> restraint in the monastic code;[^152]\
> moderation in eating;\
> staying in remote lodgings;\
> commitment to the higher mind---[^153]\
> this is the instruction of the Buddhas.'

### 17. Being Informed by Deities  {#being-informed-by-deities .unnumbered}

This one time, mendicants, I was staying near [Ukkaṭṭhā]{lang="sa"}, in
the Subhaga Forest at the root of a magnificent sal tree.[^154] As I was
in private retreat this thought came to mind, 'It's not easy to find an
abode of sentient beings where I haven't previously abided in all this
long time, except for the gods of the pure abodes.[^155] Why don't I go
to see them?'

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, I
vanished from the Subhaga Forest and reappeared with the gods of Aviha.

In that order of gods, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of
deities approached me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me,[^156]
'Ninety-one eons ago, good sir, the Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} arose in
the world, perfected and fully awakened. He was born as an aristocrat
into an aristocrat family. [Koṇḍañña]{lang="sa"} was his clan. He lived
for 80,000 years. He was awakened at the root of a patala tree. He had a
fine pair of chief disciples named [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} and Tissa. He had
three gatherings of disciples---one of 6,800,000, one of 100,000, and
one of 80,000---all of them mendicants who had ended their defilements.
He had as chief attendant a mendicant named Asoka. His father was King
[Bandhumā]{lang="sa"}, his birth mother was Queen
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}, and their capital city was named
[Bandhumatī]{lang="sa"}. And such was his renunciation, such his going
forth, such his striving, such his awakening, and such his rolling forth
of the wheel of Dhamma.[^157] And good sir, after leading the spiritual
life under that Buddha [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} we lost our desire for
sensual pleasures and were reborn here.'[^158]

And other deities came and similarly recounted the details of the
Buddhas [Sikhī]{lang="sa"}, [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}, Kakusandha,
[Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}, and Kassapa.[^159]

In that order of gods, many thousands, many hundreds of thousands of
deities approached me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me, 'In the
present fortunate eon, good sir, you have arisen in the world, perfected
and fully awakened. You were born as an aristocrat into an aristocrat
family. Gotama is your clan. For you the lifespan is short, brief, and
fleeting. A long-lived person lives for a century or a little more. You
were awakened at the root of a peepal tree. You have a fine pair of
chief disciples named [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and
[Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}. You have had one gathering of disciples---1,250
mendicants who had ended their defilements. You have as chief attendant
a mendicant named Ānanda. Your father was King Suddhodana, your birth
mother was Queen [Māyā]{lang="sa"}, and your capital city was
Kapilavatthu. And such was your renunciation, such your going forth,
such your striving, such your awakening, and such your rolling forth of
the wheel of Dhamma. And good sir, after leading the spiritual life
under you we lost our desire for sensual pleasures and were reborn
here.'

Then together with the gods of Aviha I went to see the gods of Atappa
... the gods fair to see ... and the fair seeing gods. Then together
with all these gods I went to see the gods of [Akaniṭṭha]{lang="sa"},
where we had a similar conversation.

And that is how the Realized One is able to recollect the birth, names,
clans, lifespan, chief disciples, and gatherings of disciples of the
Buddhas of the past who have become fully quenched, cut off
proliferation, cut off the track, finished off the cycle, and
transcended all suffering. It is both because I have clearly
comprehended the principle of the teachings, and also because the
deities told me."[^160]

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 15 The Great Discourse on Causation  *Mahānidānasutta* {#n-15-the-great-discourse-on-causation-mahānidānasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. Dependent Origination  {#dependent-origination .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^161]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named
[Kammāsadamma]{lang="sa"}.[^162]

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him,[^163] "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, in
that this dependent origination is deep and appears deep, yet to me it
seems as plain as can be."[^164]

"Don't say that, Ānanda, don't say that! This dependent origination is
deep and appears deep.[^165] It is because of not understanding and not
penetrating this teaching that this population has become tangled like
string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds,
and it doesn't escape the places of loss, the bad places, the
underworld, transmigration.[^166]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for old age and death?' you
should answer, 'There is.'[^167] If they say, 'What is a condition for
old age and death?' you should answer, 'Rebirth is a condition for old
age and death.'[^168]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for rebirth?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for rebirth?' you
should answer, 'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.'[^169]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for continued existence?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
continued existence?' you should answer, 'Grasping is a condition for
continued existence.'[^170]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for grasping?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for grasping?' you
should answer, 'Craving is a condition for grasping.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for craving?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for craving?' you
should answer, 'Feeling is a condition for craving.'[^171]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for feeling?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for feeling?' you
should answer, 'Contact is a condition for feeling.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for contact?' you should
answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for contact?' you
should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for contact.'[^172]

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for name and form?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for name
and form?' you should answer, 'Consciousness is a condition for name and
form.'

When asked, 'Is there a specific condition for consciousness?' you
should answer, 'There is.' If they say, 'What is a condition for
consciousness?' you should answer, 'Name and form are conditions for
consciousness.'[^173]

So: name and form are conditions for consciousness. Consciousness is a
condition for name and form. Name and form are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving.
Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition for
continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress to come to be.[^174] That is how this entire mass
of suffering originates.

'Rebirth is a condition for old age and death'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so.[^175] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no rebirth for anyone anywhere.[^176] That is, there
were no rebirth of sentient beings into their various realms---of gods,
centaurs, spirits, creatures, humans, quadrupeds, birds, or reptiles,
each into their own realm. When there's no rebirth at all, with the
cessation of rebirth, would old age and death still be found?"[^177]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of old age and
death, namely rebirth.[^178]

'Continued existence is a condition for rebirth'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no continued existence for anyone anywhere. That is,
continued existence in the sensual realm, the realm of luminous form, or
the formless realm. When there's no continued existence at all, with the
cessation of continued existence, would rebirth still be found?"[^179]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of rebirth,
namely continued existence.

'Grasping is a condition for continued existence'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were
totally and utterly no grasping for anyone anywhere. That is, grasping
at sensual pleasures, views, precepts and observances, and theories of a
self. When there's no grasping at all, with the cessation of grasping,
would continued existence still be found?"[^180]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of continued
existence, namely grasping.

'Craving is a condition for grasping'---that's what I said. And this is
a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and
utterly no craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. When there's no craving at
all, with the cessation of craving, would grasping still be
found?"[^181]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of grasping,
namely craving.

'Feeling is a condition for craving'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no feeling for anyone anywhere. That is, feeling born of contact through
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no feeling at
all, with the cessation of feeling, would craving still be found?"[^182]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of craving,
namely feeling.

So it is, Ānanda, that feeling is a cause of craving. Craving is a cause
of seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material things. Gaining
material things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is a cause of
desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment. Attachment is
a cause of ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess. Stinginess is
a cause of safeguarding.[^183] Owing to safeguarding, many bad,
unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels,
arguments, and disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and lies.[^184]

'Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to be: taking
up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and disputes,
accusations, divisive speech, and lies'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^185] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no safeguarding for anyone anywhere. When there's no
safeguarding at all, with the cessation of safeguarding, would those
many bad, unskillful things still come to be?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason for the
origination of those many bad, unskillful things, namely safeguarding.

'Stinginess is a cause of safeguarding'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^186] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no stinginess for anyone anywhere. When there's no
stinginess at all, with the cessation of stinginess, would safeguarding
still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
safeguarding, namely stinginess.

'Ownership is a cause of stinginess'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly
no ownership for anyone anywhere. When there's no ownership at all, with
the cessation of ownership, would stinginess still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of stinginess,
namely ownership.

'Attachment is a cause of ownership'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so.[^187] Suppose there were totally and
utterly no attachment for anyone anywhere. When there's no attachment at
all, with the cessation of attachment, would ownership still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of ownership,
namely attachment.

'Desire and lust is a cause of attachment'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally
and utterly no desire and lust for anyone anywhere. When there's no
desire and lust at all, with the cessation of desire and lust, would
attachment still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of attachment,
namely desire and lust.

Evaluation is a cause of desire and lust'---that's what I said. And this
is a way to understand how this is so.[^188] Suppose there were totally
and utterly no evaluation for anyone anywhere. When there's no
evaluation at all, with the cessation of evaluation, would desire and
lust still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of desire and
lust, namely evaluation.

'Gaining material things is a cause of evaluation'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^189] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no gaining of material things for anyone anywhere.
When there's no gaining of material things at all, with the cessation of
gaining material things, would evaluation still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of evaluation,
namely the gaining of material things.

'Seeking is a cause of gaining material things'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^190] Suppose there were
totally and utterly no seeking for anyone anywhere. When there's no
seeking at all, with the cessation of seeking, would the gaining of
material things still be found?"

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of gaining
material things, namely seeking.

'Craving is a cause of seeking'---that's what I said. And this is a way
to understand how this is so. Suppose there were totally and utterly no
craving for anyone anywhere. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving for continued existence, and craving to end existence. When
there's no craving at all, with the cessation of craving, would seeking
still be found?"[^191]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of seeking,
namely craving. And so, Ānanda, these two things are united by the two
aspects of feeling.[^192]

'Contact is a condition for feeling'---that's what I said. And this is a
way to understand how this is so.[^193] Suppose there were totally and
utterly no contact for anyone anywhere. That is, contact through the
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. When there's no contact at all,
with the cessation of contact, would feeling still be found?"[^194]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of feeling,
namely contact.

'Name and form are conditions for contact'---that's what I said. And
this is a way to understand how this is so.[^195] Suppose there were
none of the features, attributes, signs, and details by which the set of
mental phenomena known as name is found. Would labeling contact still be
found in the set of physical phenomena?"[^196]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of physical phenomena known as form is found. Would
impingement contact still be found in the set of mental
phenomena?"[^197]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which the set of phenomena known as name and the set of phenomena
known as form are found. Would either labeling contact or impingement
contact still be found?"[^198]

"No, sir."

"Suppose there were none of the features, attributes, signs, and details
by which name and form are found. Would contact still be found?"[^199]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of contact,
namely name and form.

'Consciousness is a condition for name and form'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^200] If consciousness
were not conceived in the mother's womb, would name and form coagulate
there?"[^201]

"No, sir."

"If consciousness, after being conceived in the mother's womb, were to
be miscarried, would name and form be born into this place?"[^202]

"No, sir."

"If the consciousness of a young boy or girl were to be cut off, would
name and form achieve growth, increase, and maturity?"[^203]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of name and
form, namely consciousness.

'Name and form are conditions for consciousness'---that's what I said.
And this is a way to understand how this is so.[^204] If consciousness
were not to gain a footing in name and form, would the coming to be of
the origin of suffering---of rebirth, old age, and death in the
future---be found?"[^205]

"No, sir."

"That's why this is the cause, source, origin, and reason of
consciousness, namely name and form. This is the extent to which one may
be reborn, grow old, die, pass away, or reappear.[^206] This is how far
the scope of labeling, terminology, and description extends; how far the
sphere of wisdom extends; how far the cycle of rebirths proceeds so that
this state of being may be found; namely, name and form together with
consciousness.[^207]

### 2. Describing the Self  {#describing-the-self .unnumbered}

How do those who describe the self describe it?[^208] They describe it
as formed and limited:[^209] 'My self is formed and limited.'[^210] Or
they describe it as formed and infinite: 'My self is formed and
infinite.'[^211] Or they describe it as formless and limited: 'My self
is formless and limited.'[^212] Or they describe it as formless and
infinite: 'My self is formless and infinite.'[^213]

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and limited. They
describe the self in the present as formed and limited; or they describe
it as sure to be in some other place formed and limited; or else they
think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided with
what it needs to become like that.'[^214] This being so, it's
appropriate to say that a view of self as formed and limited underlies
them.[^215]

Now, take those who describe the self as formed and infinite ...
formless and limited ... formless and infinite. They describe the self
as formless and infinite in the present; or as sure to become formless
and infinite in some other place; or else they think: 'Though it is not
like that, I will ensure it is provided with what it needs to become
like that.' This being so, it's appropriate to say that a view of self
as formless and infinite underlies them. That's how those who describe
the self describe it.

### 3. Not Describing the Self  {#not-describing-the-self .unnumbered}

How do those who don't describe the self not describe it?[^216] They
don't describe it as formed and limited ... formed and infinite ...
formless and limited ... formless and infinite: 'My self is formless and
infinite.'

Now, take those who don't describe the self as formed and limited ...
formed and infinite ... formless and limited ... formless and infinite.
They don't describe the self in the present as formless and infinite; or
as sure to become in some other place formless and infinite; and they
don't think: 'Though it is not like that, I will ensure it is provided
with what it needs to become like that.' This being so, it's appropriate
to say that a view of self as formless and infinite doesn't underlie
them. That's how those who don't describe the self don't describe it.

### 4. Regarding a Self  {#regarding-a-self .unnumbered}

How do those who regard the self regard it?[^217] They regard feeling as
self:[^218] 'Feeling is my self.'[^219] Or they regard it like this:
'Feeling is definitely not my self. My self does not experience
feeling.'[^220] Or they regard it like this: 'Feeling is definitely not
my self. But it's not that my self does not experience feeling. My self
feels, for my self is liable to feel.'[^221]

Now, as to those who say:[^222] 'Feeling is my self.' You should say
this to them: 'Reverend, there are three feelings: pleasant, painful,
and neutral.[^223] Which one of these do you regard as self?' Ānanda, at
a time when you feel a pleasant feeling, you don't feel a painful or
neutral feeling;[^224] you only feel a pleasant feeling. At a time when
you feel a painful feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or neutral
feeling; you only feel a painful feeling. At a time when you feel a
neutral feeling, you don't feel a pleasant or painful feeling; you only
feel a neutral feeling.

Pleasant feelings, painful feelings, and neutral feelings are all
impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated, liable to end, vanish,
fade away, and cease. When feeling a pleasant feeling they think: 'This
is my self.' When their pleasant feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a painful feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their painful feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' When feeling a neutral feeling they think: 'This is my
self.' When their neutral feeling ceases they think: 'My self has
disappeared.' So those who say 'feeling is my self' regard as self that
which is evidently impermanent, mixed with pleasure and pain, and liable
to rise and fall. That's why it's not acceptable to regard feeling as
self.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. My self
does not experience feeling.' You should say this to them, 'But
reverend, where there is nothing felt at all, would the thought "I am"
occur there?'"[^225]

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which does not
experience feeling.

Now, as to those who say: 'Feeling is definitely not my self. But it's
not that my self does not experience feeling. My self feels, for my self
is liable to feel.' You should say this to them, 'Suppose feelings were
to totally and utterly cease without anything left over. When there's no
feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought "I am
this" occur there?'"[^226]

"No, sir."

"That's why it's not acceptable to regard self as that which is liable
to feel.

Not regarding anything in this way, they don't grasp at anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become extinguished.[^227] They understand: 'Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place.'

It wouldn't be appropriate to say that a mendicant whose mind is freed
like this holds the following views: 'A realized one still exists after
death'; 'A realized one no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
both still exists and no longer exists after death'; 'A realized one
neither still exists nor no longer exists after death'.

Why is that? A mendicant is freed by directly knowing this: how far
labeling and the scope of labeling extend; how far terminology and the
scope of terminology extend; how far description and the scope of
description extend; how far wisdom and the sphere of wisdom extend; how
far the cycle of rebirths and its continuation extend. It wouldn't be
appropriate to say that a mendicant freed by directly knowing this holds
the view: 'There is no such thing as knowing and seeing.'[^228]

### 5. Planes of Consciousness  {#planes-of-consciousness .unnumbered}

Ānanda, there are seven planes of consciousness and two
dimensions.[^229] What seven?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first plane of consciousness.[^230]

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

Then there is the dimension of non-percipient beings, and secondly, the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception.[^231]

Now, regarding these seven planes of consciousness and two dimensions,
is it appropriate for someone who understands them---and their origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape---to take pleasure in
them?"[^232]

"No, sir."

"When a mendicant, having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape regarding these seven planes of
consciousness and these two dimensions, is freed by not grasping,
they're called a mendicant who is freed by wisdom.[^233]

### 6. The Eight Liberations  {#the-eight-liberations .unnumbered}

Ānanda, there are these eight liberations.[^234] What eight?

Having physical form, they see forms.[^235] This is the first
liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally.[^236] This is
the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty.[^237] This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling.[^238] This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations.

When a mendicant enters into and withdraws from these eight
liberations---in forward order, in reverse order, and in forward and
reverse order---wherever they wish, whenever they wish, and for as long
as they wish;[^239] and when they realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, they're called
a mendicant who is freed both ways.[^240] And, Ānanda, there is no other
freedom both ways that is better or finer than this."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Ānanda approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 16 The Great Discourse on the Buddha's Extinguishment  *Mahāparinibbānasutta* {#n-16-the-great-discourse-on-the-buddhas-extinguishment-mahāparinibbānasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^241]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. Now at that
time King [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} of Magadha, son of the princess of
Videha, wanted to invade the Vajjis.[^242] He declared: "I shall wipe
out these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy them, and lay
ruin and devastation upon them!"[^243]

And then King [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} addressed [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"}
the brahmin minister of Magadha,[^244] "Please, brahmin, go to the
Buddha, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is
healthy and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then say:
'Sir, King [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} of Magadha, son of the princess of
Videha, wants to invade the Vajjis. He says, "I shall wipe out these
Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy them, and lay ruin and
devastation upon them!"'[^245] Remember well how the Buddha answers and
tell it to me. For Realized Ones say nothing that is not so."[^246]

### 1. The Brahmin [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"}  {#the-brahmin-vassakāra .unnumbered}

"Yes, sir," [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} replied. He had the finest carriages
harnessed. Then he mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out from [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} for the Vulture's Peak
Mountain.[^247] He went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then
descended and approached the Buddha on foot, and exchanged greetings
with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, King
[Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha, bows
with his head to your feet. He asks if you are healthy and well, nimble,
strong, and living comfortably. Mister Gotama, King
[Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} wants to invade the Vajjis. He has declared: 'I
shall wipe out these Vajjis, so mighty and powerful! I shall destroy
them, and lay ruin and devastation upon them!'"

### 2. Principles That Prevent Decline  {#principles-that-prevent-decline .unnumbered}

Now at that time Venerable Ānanda was standing behind the Buddha fanning
him.[^248] Then the Buddha said to him, "Ānanda, have you heard that the
Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings?"[^249]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet frequently and have many meetings, they can
expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in
harmony, and carry on their business in harmony?"[^250]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry on
their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish
existing decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian
traditions as they have been decreed?"[^251]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but proceed having undertaken the ancient Vajjian traditions as
they have been decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate Vajjian elders, and think them worth listening to?"

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate Vajjian
elders, and think them worth listening to, they can expect growth, not
decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women
or girls of the clans and make them live with them?"[^252]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis don't forcibly abduct the women or girls of the
clans and make them live with them, they can expect growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and
venerate the Vajjian shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the
proper spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past?"[^253]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the Vajjian
shrines, whether inner or outer, not neglecting the proper
spirit-offerings that were given and made in the past, they can expect
growth, not decline.

Ānanda, have you heard that the Vajjis organize proper protection,
shelter, and security for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones
might come to the realm and those already here may live in
comfort?"[^254]

"I have heard that, sir."

"As long as the Vajjis organize proper protection, shelter, and security
for perfected ones, so that more perfected ones might come to the realm
and those already here may live in comfort, they can expect growth, not
decline."

Then the Buddha said to [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"}, "Brahmin, this one time
I was staying near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} at the [Sārandada]{lang="sa"}
woodland shrine.[^255] There I taught the Vajjis these seven principles
that prevent decline.[^256] As long as these seven principles that
prevent decline last among the Vajjis, and as long as the Vajjis are
seen following them, they can expect growth, not decline."

When the Buddha had spoken, [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} said to him, "Mister
Gotama, if the Vajjis follow even a single one of these principles they
can expect growth, not decline. How much more so all seven! King
[Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} cannot defeat the Vajjis in war, unless by
bribery or by sowing dissension.[^257] Well, now, Mister Gotama, I must
go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, brahmin, go at your convenience." Then [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"}
the brahmin, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, got
up from his seat and left.

### 3. Principles That Prevent Decline Among the Mendicants  {#principles-that-prevent-decline-among-the-mendicants .unnumbered}

Soon after he had left, the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Go, Ānanda, gather
all the mendicants staying in the vicinity of [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}
together in the assembly hall."[^258]

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked. Then he went
back, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} has assembled. Please, sir, go at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out and addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, I will teach you
these seven principles that prevent decline.[^259] Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"As long as the mendicants meet frequently and have many meetings, they
can expect growth, not decline.[^260]

As long as the mendicants meet in harmony, leave in harmony, and carry
on their business in harmony, they can expect growth, not decline.[^261]

As long as the mendicants don't make new decrees or abolish existing
decrees, but undertake and follow the training rules as they have been
decreed, they can expect growth, not decline.[^262]

As long as the mendicants honor, respect, esteem, and venerate the
senior mendicants---of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and
leaders of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}---and think them worth listening to,
they can expect growth, not decline.[^263]

As long as the mendicants don't fall under the sway of arisen craving
for future lives, they can expect growth, not decline.[^264]

As long as the mendicants take care to live in wilderness lodgings, they
can expect growth, not decline.[^265]

As long as the mendicants individually establish mindfulness, so that
more good-hearted spiritual companions might come, and those that have
already come may live comfortably, they can expect growth, not
decline.[^266]

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline. ...[^267]

As long as the mendicants don't relish work, loving it and liking to
relish it, they can expect growth, not decline.[^268]

As long as they don't relish talk ...

sleep ...

company ...

they don't have corrupt wishes, falling under the sway of corrupt wishes
...[^269]

they don't have bad friends, companions, and associates ...

they don't stop half-way after achieving some insignificant distinction,
they can expect growth, not decline.[^270]

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline. ...[^271]
As long as the mendicants are faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ...
learned ... energetic ... mindful ... wise, they can expect growth, not
decline. As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last
among the mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following
them, they can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline. ...[^272]

As long as the mendicants develop the awakening factors of mindfulness
... investigation of principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility
... immersion ... equanimity, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you seven more principles that prevent decline. ...[^273]

As long as the mendicants develop the perceptions of impermanence ...
not-self ... ugliness ... drawbacks ... giving up ... fading away ...
cessation, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as these seven principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline.

I will teach you six principles that prevent decline. ...[^274]

As long as the mendicants consistently treat their spiritual companions
with bodily kindness ... verbal kindness ... and mental kindness both in
public and in private, they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants share without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions,
they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants live according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private---such
precepts as are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion---they can expect growth, not decline.

As long as the mendicants live according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private---the view that is
noble and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the
complete end of suffering---they can expect growth, not decline.[^275]

As long as these six principles that prevent decline last among the
mendicants, and as long as the mendicants are seen following them, they
can expect growth, not decline."

And while staying there at the Vulture's Peak the Buddha often gave this
Dhamma talk to the mendicants:[^276]

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial.[^277] When wisdom
is imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the
mind is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements,
namely, the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance."[^278]

When the Buddha had stayed in [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} as long as he
pleased, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
[Ambalaṭṭhikā]{lang="sa"}."[^279]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at [Ambalaṭṭhikā]{lang="sa"},
where he stayed in the royal rest-house. And while staying there, too,
he often gave this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

When the Buddha had stayed in [Ambalaṭṭhikā]{lang="sa"} as long as he
pleased, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
[Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"}."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"}, where
he stayed in [Pāvārika]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove.

### 4. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s Lion's Roar  {#sāriputtas-lions-roar .unnumbered}

Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him,[^280] "Sir, I have such confidence in the
Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or brahmin---whether
past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is superior to the
Buddha when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. You've
roared a definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such
confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or
brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is
superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such teachings, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, given that you don't comprehend the
minds of Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing,
making such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the teaching.[^281]
Suppose there was a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and intelligent. He keeps strangers out and lets
known people in. As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn't see a
hole or cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip
out. He thinks: 'Whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel,
all of them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'"

And while staying at [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"}, too, the Buddha often gave
this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 5. The Drawbacks of Unethical Conduct  {#the-drawbacks-of-unethical-conduct .unnumbered}

When the Buddha had stayed in [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"} as long as he
pleased, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
[Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village."[^282]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"}
Village.

The lay followers of [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village heard that he had
arrived. So they went to see him, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, please consent to come to our guest house." The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the lay followers of
[Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right. Then they
went to the guest house, where they spread carpets all over, prepared
seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp. Then they went back
to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and told him of their
preparations, saying: "Please, sir, come at your convenience."

In the morning, the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went
to the guest house together with the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants.
Having washed his feet he entered the guest house and sat against the
central column facing east. The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants also
washed their feet, entered the guest house, and sat against the west
wall facing east, with the Buddha right in front of them. The lay
followers of [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village also washed their feet, entered
the guest house, and sat against the east wall facing west, with the
Buddha right in front of them.

Then the Buddha addressed them:

"Householders, there are these five drawbacks for an unethical person
because of their failure in ethics.[^283] What five?

Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence.[^284] This is the first drawback for an unethical person
because of their failure in ethics.

Furthermore, an unethical person gets a bad reputation. This is the
second drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and
embarrassed, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person feels lost when they die.[^285] This is
the fourth drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
This is the fifth drawback.

These are the five drawbacks for an unethical person because of their
failure in ethics.

### 6. The Benefits of Ethical Conduct  {#the-benefits-of-ethical-conduct .unnumbered}

There are these five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics. What five?

Firstly, an ethical person gains great wealth on account of diligence.
This is the first benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person gets a good reputation. This is the
second benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and
self-assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person dies not feeling lost. This is the fourth
benefit.

Furthermore, when an ethical person's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth
benefit.

These are the five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics."

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the lay followers of [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village with a
Dhamma talk. Then he dismissed them, "The night is getting late,
householders. Please go at your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the lay followers of [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village.
They got up from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on their right, before leaving. Soon after they left the
Buddha entered a private cubicle.[^286]

### 7. Building a Citadel  {#building-a-citadel .unnumbered}

Now at that time the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and
[Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} were building a citadel at [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"}
Village to keep the Vajjis out.[^287] At that time thousands of deities
were taking possession of building sites in [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"}
Village.[^288] Illustrious rulers or royal ministers inclined to build
houses at sites possessed by illustrious deities. Middling rulers or
royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by middling
deities. Lesser rulers or royal ministers inclined to build houses at
sites possessed by lesser deities.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha saw those
deities taking possession of building sites in [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"}
Village. The Buddha rose at the crack of dawn and addressed Ānanda,
"Ānanda, who is building a citadel at [Pāṭali]{lang="sa"} Village?"

"Sir, the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} are
building a citadel to keep the Vajjis out."

"It's as if they were building the citadel in consultation with the gods
of the thirty-three. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
I saw those deities taking possession of building sites. Illustrious
rulers or royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by
illustrious deities. Middling rulers or royal ministers inclined to
build houses at sites possessed by middling deities. Lesser rulers or
royal ministers inclined to build houses at sites possessed by lesser
deities. As far as the civilized region extends, as far as the trading
zone extends, this will be the chief city: the [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"}
trade center.[^289] But [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"} will face three
threats: from fire, flood, and dissension."[^290]

Then the Magadhan ministers Sunidha and [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"}
approached the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they stood to one side and
said, "Would Mister Gotama together with the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} please accept today's meal from me?" The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, they went to their own
guest house, where they had delicious fresh and cooked foods prepared.
Then they had the Buddha informed of the time, saying, "It's time,
Mister Gotama, the meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to their guest house together with the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then Sunidha
and [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} served and satisfied the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} headed by the Buddha with their own hands with
delicious fresh and cooked foods. When the Buddha had eaten and washed
his hand and bowl, Sunidha and [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} took a low seat
and sat to one side.

The Buddha expressed his appreciation with these verses:[^291]

> "In the place he makes his dwelling,\
> having fed the astute\
> and the virtuous here,\
> the restrained spiritual practitioners,
>
> he should dedicate an offering[^292]\
> to the deities there.\
> Venerated, they venerate him;\
> honored, they honor him.
>
> After that they have sympathy for him,\
> like a mother for the child at her breast.\
> A man beloved of the deities\
> always sees nice things."[^293]

When the Buddha had expressed his appreciation to Sunidha and
[Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} with these verses, he got up from his seat and
left.

Sunidha and [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} followed behind the Buddha, thinking,
"The gate through which the ascetic Gotama departs today shall be named
the Gotama Gate. The ford at which he crosses the Ganges River shall be
named the Gotama Ford."[^294]

Then the gate through which the Buddha departed was named the Gotama
Gate.

Then the Buddha came to the Ganges River.

Now at that time the Ganges was full to the brim so a crow could drink
from it. Wanting to cross from the near to the far shore, some people
were seeking a boat, some a dinghy, while some were tying up a
raft.[^295] But, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, the Buddha, together with the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"},
vanished from the near shore and landed on the far shore.[^296]

He saw all those people wanting to cross over. Knowing the meaning of
this, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

> "Those who cross a deluge or stream[^297]\
> have built a bridge and left the marshes behind.\
> While some people are still tying a raft,\
> intelligent people have crossed over."

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 8. Talk on the Noble Truths  {#talk-on-the-noble-truths .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the
village of [Koṭi]{lang="sa"}."[^298]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at the village of
[Koṭi]{lang="sa"}, and stayed there.

There he addressed the mendicants:[^299]

"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four noble
truths, both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very
long time. What four? The noble truths of suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering. These noble truths of suffering, origin,
cessation, and the path have been understood and comprehended. Craving
for continued existence has been cut off; the conduit to rebirth is
ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Because of not truly seeing\
> the four noble truths,\
> we have transmigrated for a long time\
> from one rebirth to the next.
>
> But now that these truths have been seen,\
> the conduit to rebirth is eradicated.\
> The root of suffering is cut off,\
> now there'll be no more future lives."

And while staying at the village of [Koṭi]{lang="sa"}, too, the Buddha
often gave this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 9. The Deaths in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}  {#the-deaths-in-ñātika .unnumbered}

When the Buddha had stayed in the village of [Koṭi]{lang="sa"} as long
as he pleased, he said to Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the land of
the [Ñātikas]{lang="sa"}."[^300]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived in the land of the
[Ñātikas]{lang="sa"}, where he stayed in the brick house at
[Ñātika]{lang="sa"}.[^301]

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, the monk named [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} has
passed away in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}. Where has he been reborn in his next
life?[^302] The nun named [Nandā]{lang="sa"}, the layman named Sudatta,
and the laywoman named [Sujātā]{lang="sa"} have passed away in
[Ñātika]{lang="sa"}. Where have they been reborn in the next life?[^303]
The laymen named [Kakkaṭa]{lang="sa"},[^304] [Kaḷibha]{lang="sa"},
Nikata, [Kaṭissaha]{lang="sa"}, [Tuṭṭha]{lang="sa"},
[Santuṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, Bhadda, and Subhadda have passed away in
[Ñātika]{lang="sa"}. Where have they been reborn in the next life?"

"Ānanda, the monk [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} had realized the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, having realized it
with his own insight due to the ending of defilements.

The nun [Nandā]{lang="sa"} had ended the five lower fetters. She's been
reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world.

The layman Sudatta had ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate,
and delusion. He's a once-returner; he will come back to this world once
only, then make an end of suffering.

The laywoman [Sujātā]{lang="sa"} had ended three fetters. She's a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening.

The laymen [Kakkaṭa]{lang="sa"}, [Kaḷibha]{lang="sa"}, Nikata,
[Kaṭissaha]{lang="sa"}, [Tuṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, [Santuṭṭha]{lang="sa"},
Bhadda, and Subhadda had ended the five lower fetters. They've been
reborn spontaneously, and will be extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world.[^305]

Over fifty laymen in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away having ended
the five lower fetters. They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be
extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.

More than ninety laymen in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away having
ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They're
once-returners, who will come back to this world once only, then make an
end of suffering.

More than five hundred laymen in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away
having ended three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.[^306]

### 10. The Mirror of the Teaching  {#the-mirror-of-the-teaching .unnumbered}

It's no wonder that a human being should pass away. But if you should
come and ask me about it each and every time someone passes away, that
would be a bother for me.

So Ānanda, I will teach you the explanation of the Dhamma called 'the
mirror of the teaching'. A noble disciple who has this may declare of
themselves:[^307] 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places,
the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what is that mirror of the teaching?[^308]

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Buddha:[^309] 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.'[^310]

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.'[^311]

They have experiential confidence in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.'[^312]

And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones,
unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.[^313]

This is that mirror of the teaching."

And while staying there in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} the Buddha often gave
this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

When the Buddha had stayed in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} as long as he pleased,
he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"}."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, where
he stayed in [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove.[^314]

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, a mendicant should live mindful and aware.[^315] This is my
instruction to you.

And how is a mendicant mindful?[^316] It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world.[^317] They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.[^318]
That's how a mendicant is mindful.

And how is a mendicant aware? It's when a mendicant acts with
situational awareness when going out and coming back; when looking ahead
and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when bearing the outer
robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when
urinating and defecating; when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping,
waking, speaking, and keeping silent. That's how a mendicant is aware. A
mendicant should live mindful and aware. This is my instruction to you."

### 11. [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} the Courtesan  {#ambapālī-the-courtesan .unnumbered}

[Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} the courtesan heard that the Buddha had arrived
and was staying in her mango grove.[^319] She had the finest carriages
harnessed. Then she mounted a fine carriage and, along with other fine
carriages, set out from [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} for her own park. She went
by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then descended and approached
the Buddha on foot. She bowed and sat down to one side. The Buddha
educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired her with a Dhamma talk.

Then she said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together with the
mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} please accept tomorrow's meal from me."
The Buddha consented with silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had
consented, [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} got up from her seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on her right, before
leaving.

The Licchavis of [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} also heard that the Buddha had
arrived and was staying in [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove. They had
the finest carriages harnessed. Then they mounted a fine carriage and,
along with other fine carriages, set out from [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. Some
of the Licchavis were in blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned with
blue. And some were similarly colored in yellow, red, or white.[^320]

Then [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} the courtesan collided with those Licchavi
youths, axle to axle, wheel to wheel, yoke to yoke.[^321] The Licchavis
said to her, "What, you wench [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}, are you doing
colliding with us axle to axle, wheel to wheel, yoke to yoke?"[^322]

"Well, masters, it's because I've invited the Buddha for tomorrow's meal
together with the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}."

"Wench, give us that meal for a hundred thousand!"

"Masters, even if you were to give me [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} with her
provinces, I still wouldn't give that meal to you."[^323]

Then the Licchavis snapped their fingers, saying, "We've been beaten by
the aunty! We've been beaten by the aunty!"[^324] Then they continued on
to [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove.

The Buddha saw them coming off in the distance, and addressed the
mendicants: "Any of the mendicants who've never seen the gods of the
thirty-three, just have a look at the assembly of Licchavis. See the
assembly of Licchavis, check them out: they're just like the
thirty-three!"

The Licchavis went by carriage as far as the terrain allowed, then
descended and approached the Buddha on foot. They bowed to the Buddha,
sat down to one side, and the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and
inspired them with a Dhamma talk.

Then they said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together with the
mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} please accept tomorrow's meal from us."

Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis, "I have already accepted
tomorrow's meal from [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} the courtesan."

Then the Licchavis snapped their fingers, saying, "We've been beaten by
the aunty! We've been beaten by the aunty!"

And then those Licchavis approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
They got up from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on their right, before leaving.

And when the night had passed [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} had delicious fresh
and cooked foods prepared in her own park. Then she had the Buddha
informed of the time, saying, "Sir, it's time. The meal is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} together with the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then
[Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} served and satisfied the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} headed by the Buddha with her own hands with
delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hands and bowl,
[Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} took a low seat, sat to one side, and said to the
Buddha, "Sir, I present this park to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}
headed by the Buddha."[^325]

The Buddha accepted the park.[^326]

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired her with a
Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and left.

And while staying at [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, too, the Buddha often gave
this Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 12. Commencing the Rains at Beluva  {#commencing-the-rains-at-beluva .unnumbered}

When the Buddha had stayed in [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove as
long as he pleased, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's
go to the little village of Beluva."[^327]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at the little village of
Beluva, and stayed there.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, please enter the
rainy season residence with whatever friends or acquaintances you have
around [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}.[^328] I'll commence the rainy season
residence right here in the little village of Beluva."

"Yes, sir," those mendicants replied. They did as the Buddha said, while
the Buddha commenced the rainy season residence right there in the
little village of Beluva.

After the Buddha had commenced the rainy season residence, he fell
severely ill, struck by dreadful pains, close to death. But he endured
unbothered, with mindfulness and situational awareness. Then it occurred
to the Buddha, "It would not be appropriate for me to be fully
extinguished before informing my supporters and taking leave of the
mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}.[^329] Why don't I forcefully suppress
this illness, stabilize the life force, and live on?"[^330]

So that is what he did. Then the Buddha's illness died down.

Soon after the Buddha had recovered from that sickness, he came out from
his dwelling and sat in the shade of the porch on the seat spread out.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, it's fantastic that the Buddha is
comfortable and well. Because when the Buddha was sick, my body felt
like it was drugged. I was disorientated, and the teachings weren't
clear to me.[^331] Still, at least I was consoled by the thought that
the Buddha won't be fully extinguished without bringing something up
regarding the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants."[^332]

"But what could the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} expect from me,
Ānanda?[^333] I've taught the Dhamma without making any distinction
between secret and public teachings.[^334] The Realized One doesn't have
the closed fist of a tutor when it comes to the teachings.[^335] If
there's anyone who thinks: 'I shall lead the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"},' or 'the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants is meant
for me,' let them bring something up regarding the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}.
But the Realized One doesn't think like this, so why should he bring
something up regarding the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}?[^336]

I'm now old, elderly and senior. I'm advanced in years and have reached
the final stage of life. I'm currently eighty years old. Just as a
decrepit old cart is kept going by a rope,[^337] in the same way, the
Realized One's body is kept going as if by a rope.[^338] Sometimes the
Realized One, not focusing on any signs, and with the cessation of
certain feelings, enters and remains in the signless immersion of the
heart. Only then does the Realized One's body become more
comfortable.[^339]

So Ānanda, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.[^340] And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant is their own island, their own refuge, with no other
refuge. That's how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with
no other refuge.

Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own
island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as
their island and their refuge, with no other refuge---those mendicants
of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best."[^341]

:::: Center
::: small
*The second recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 13. An Obvious Hint  {#an-obvious-hint .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, get your
sitting cloth.[^342] Let's go to the [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} shrine for the
day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} shrine, where he sat
on the seat spread out. Ānanda bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one
side.

The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} is lovely. And the
Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens, Many Sons, [Sārandada]{lang="sa"}, and
[Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} Tree-shrines are all lovely.

Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic
power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated
them, and properly implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it.[^343] The Realized One has
developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a
vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha: "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy One please
remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans." For his mind was as if
possessed by [Māra]{lang="sa"}.[^344]

For a second time ... And for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:
"Ānanda, [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, [Sārandada]{lang="sa"}, and [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"}
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha: "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy One please
remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans." For his mind was as if
possessed by [Māra]{lang="sa"}.

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Ānanda, "Go now, Ānanda, at
your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

### 14. The Appeal of [Māra]{lang="sa"}  {#the-appeal-of-māra .unnumbered}

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, [Māra]{lang="sa"} the Wicked
went up to the Buddha, stood to one side, and said to him:[^345]

"Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha.[^346] Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I
shall not be fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who are
competent, educated, assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and
practice in line with the teachings. Not until they practice properly,
living in line with the teaching. Not until they've learned their
tradition, and explain, teach, assert, establish, disclose, analyze, and
make it clear. Not until they can legitimately and completely refute the
doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable
basis.'[^347]

Today you do have such monk disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...'[^348]

Today you do have such nun disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have layman disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...'

Today you do have such layman disciples. May the Blessed One now be
fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is
the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have laywoman disciples who are competent,
educated, assured, learned ...'

Today you do have such laywoman disciples. May the Blessed One now be
fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is
the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I will not be fully
extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans.'

Today your spiritual path is successful and prosperous, extensive,
popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans. May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha."

When this was said, the Buddha said to [Māra]{lang="sa"}, "Relax, Wicked
One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon.[^349]
Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished."[^350]

### 15. Surrendering the Life Force  {#surrendering-the-life-force .unnumbered}

So at the [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware,
surrendered the life force.[^351] When he did so there was a great
earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the
sky.[^352] Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha
expressed this heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable\
> \>with the creation of prolonged life,[^353]\
> the sage surrendered the life force.[^354]\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor."[^355]

### 16. The Causes of Earthquakes  {#the-causes-of-earthquakes .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "How incredible, how amazing! That was a
really big earthquake! That was really a very big earthquake;
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! What's the
cause, what's the reason for a great earthquake?"

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "How incredible, sir, how amazing! That was a
really big earthquake! That was really a very big earthquake;
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky! What's the
cause, what's the reason for a great earthquake?"

"Ānanda, there are these eight causes and reasons for a great
earthquake. What eight?

This great earth is grounded on water, the water is grounded on air, and
the air stands in space. At a time when a great wind blows, it stirs the
water, and the water stirs the earth.[^356] This is the first cause and
reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, there is an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power who has
achieved mastery of the mind, or a god who is mighty and powerful.
They've developed a limited perception of earth and a limitless
perception of water. They make the earth shake and rock and
tremble.[^357] This is the second cause and reason for a great
earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening passes away from the
host of joyful gods, he's conceived in his mother's belly, mindful and
aware. Then the earth shakes and rocks and trembles.[^358] This is the
third cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening comes out of his
mother's belly mindful and aware, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles. This is the fourth cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One realizes the supreme perfect
awakening, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles.[^359] This is the
fifth cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles.[^360] This is the sixth
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One, mindful and aware, surrenders the
life force, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the seventh
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One becomes fully extinguished in the
element of extinguishment with no residue, the earth shakes and rocks
and trembles.[^361] This is the eighth cause and reason for a great
earthquake.

These are the eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake.

### 17. Eight Assemblies  {#eight-assemblies .unnumbered}

There are, Ānanda, these eight assemblies.[^362] What eight? The
assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An
assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of
the thirty-three. An assembly of [Māras]{lang="sa"}. An assembly of
divinities.[^363]

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. There
I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?'[^364]

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins ...
householders ... ascetics ... the gods of the four great kings ... the
gods of the thirty-three ... [Māras]{lang="sa"} ... divinities. There
too I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?'

These are the eight assemblies.

### 18. Eight Dimensions of Mastery  {#eight-dimensions-of-mastery .unnumbered}

Ānanda, there are these eight dimensions of mastery.[^365] What eight?

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly.[^366] Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly.[^367] Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance.[^368] They're like a flax
flower that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the fifth
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form
internally, someone sees forms externally that are yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the seventh
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally that are white, with white color and white
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
eighth dimension of mastery.

These are the eight dimensions of mastery.

### 19. The Eight Liberations  {#the-eight-liberations-1 .unnumbered}

Ānanda, there are these eight liberations.[^369] What eight?

Having physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. This is the
second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations.

Ānanda, this one time, when I was first awakened, I was staying in
[Uruvelā]{lang="sa"} at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the
[Nerañjarā]{lang="sa"} River. Then [Māra]{lang="sa"} the wicked
approached me, stood to one side, and said: 'Sir, may the Blessed One
now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished!
Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.' When he had
spoken, I said to [Māra]{lang="sa"}:

'Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have monk
disciples ... nun disciples ... layman disciples ... laywoman disciples
who are competent, educated, assured, learned.

I shall not be fully extinguished until my spiritual path is successful
and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed
wherever there are gods and humans.'

Today, just now at the [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} shrine [Māra]{lang="sa"} the
Wicked approached me once more with the same request, reminding me of my
former statement, and saying that those conditions had been fulfilled.

When he had spoken, I said to [Māra]{lang="sa"}: 'Relax, Wicked One. The
full extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon. Three months from
now the Realized One will be fully extinguished.' So today, just now at
the [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} Tree-shrine, mindful and aware, I surrendered
the life force."

### 20. The Appeal of Ānanda  {#the-appeal-of-ānanda .unnumbered}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the
Blessed One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy One
please remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

"Enough now, Ānanda. Do not beg the Realized One. Now is not the time to
beg the Realized One."

For a second time ... For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir,
may the Blessed One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the Holy
One please remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

"Ānanda, do you have faith in the Realized One's awakening?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then why do you keep pressing me up to the third time?"

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:[^370]
'Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic
power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated
them, and properly implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and
cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a
basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them.
If he wished, the Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it.'"

"Do you have faith, Ānanda?"

"Yes, sir."

"Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours alone, the mistake is yours
alone. For even though the Realized One dropped such an obvious hint,
such a clear sign, you didn't beg me to remain for the proper lifespan,
or what's left of it.[^371] If you had begged me, I would have refused
you twice, but consented on the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the
misdeed is yours alone, the mistake is yours alone.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain.[^372] There I said to you: 'Ānanda,
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} is lovely, and so is the Vulture's Peak. Whoever
has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power---made them
a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them---may, if they wish, live for the proper lifespan or
what's left of it. The Realized One has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power, made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them. If he wished, the
Realized One could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it.'
But you didn't get it, even though I dropped such an obvious hint, such
a clear sign. You didn't beg me to remain for the proper lifespan, or
what's left of it. If you had begged me, I would have refused you twice,
but consented on the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours
alone, the mistake is yours alone.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying right there near
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, at the Gotama banyan tree ...[^373] at Bandit's
Cliff ...[^374] in the [Sattapaṇṇi]{lang="sa"} cave on the slopes of
Vebhara ...[^375] at the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili ...[^376]
in the Cool Grove, under the Snake's Hood Grotto ...[^377] in the Hot
Springs Monastery ...[^378] in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground ...[^379] in [Jīvaka]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove ... in the
Maddakucchi deer park ...[^380]

And in each place I said to you: 'Ānanda, [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} is
lovely, and so are all these places. ... If he wished, the Realized One
could live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it.' But you didn't
get it, even though I dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign.
You didn't beg me to remain for the proper lifespan, or what's left of
it.

Ānanda, this one time I was staying right here near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"},
at the Udena shrine ...[^381] at the Gotamaka shrine ...[^382] at the
Seven Maidens shrine ...[^383] at the Many Sons shrine ...[^384] at the
[Sārandada]{lang="sa"} shrine ...[^385] and just now, today at the
[Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} shrine. There I said to you: 'Ānanda,
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"} is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven Maidens,
Many Sons, [Sārandada]{lang="sa"}, and [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} Tree-shrines
are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the four bases of
psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up,
consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they wish,
live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized One has
developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made them a
vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and properly
implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for the
proper lifespan or what's left of it.' But you didn't get it, even
though I dropped such an obvious hint, such a clear sign. You didn't beg
me to remain for the proper lifespan, or what's left of it, saying:
'Sir, may the Blessed One please remain for the proper lifespan! May the
Holy One please remain for the proper lifespan! That would be for the
welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.'

If you had begged me, I would have refused you twice, but consented on
the third time. Therefore, Ānanda, the misdeed is yours alone, the
mistake is yours alone.

Did I not prepare for this when I explained that we must be parted and
separated from all we hold dear and beloved? How could it possibly be so
that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should
not wear out? The Realized One has discarded, eliminated, released,
given up, relinquished, and surrendered the life force. He has
categorically stated: 'The full extinguishment of the Realized One will
be soon. Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished.' It's not possible for the Realized One, for the sake of
life, to take back the life force once it has been given up like
that.[^386]

Come, Ānanda, let's go to the Great Wood, the hall with the peaked
roof."[^387]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the hall with the peaked roof, and
said to him, "Go, Ānanda, gather all the mendicants staying in the
vicinity of [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} together in the assembly hall."[^388]

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He did what the Buddha asked, went up to
him, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} has assembled. Please, sir, go at your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out and addressed the mendicants:

"So, mendicants, having carefully memorized those things I have taught
you from my direct knowledge, you should cultivate, develop, and make
much of them so that this spiritual practice may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.[^389] And what are those things I have taught from my direct
knowledge? They are: the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four
right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the
five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold
path.[^390]

These are the things I have taught from my direct knowledge. Having
carefully memorized them, you should cultivate, develop, and make much
of them so that this spiritual practice may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Come now, mendicants, I say to you all: 'Conditions fall apart. Persist
with diligence.'[^391] The full extinguishment of the Realized One will
be soon. Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "I've reached a ripe old age,[^392]\
> and little of my life is left.\
> Having given it up, I'll depart;\
> I've made a refuge for myself.
>
> Diligent and mindful,\
> be of good virtues, mendicants!\
> With well-settled thoughts,[^393]\
> take good care of your minds.
>
> Whoever meditates diligently\
> in this teaching and training,\
> giving up transmigration through rebirths,\
> will make an end to suffering."

:::: Center
::: small
*The third recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 21. The Elephant Look  {#the-elephant-look .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he turned to gaze back at [Vesālī]{lang="sa"},
the way that elephants do. He said to Venerable Ānanda:[^394] "Ānanda,
this will be the last time the Realized One sees [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}.
Come, Ānanda, let's go to Wares Village."[^395]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

Then the Buddha together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants
arrived at Wares Village, and stayed there. There the Buddha addressed
the mendicants:

"Mendicants, due to not understanding and not penetrating four things,
both you and I have wandered and transmigrated for such a very long
time. What four? Noble ethics,[^396] immersion, wisdom, and freedom.
These noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood
and comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the
conduit to rebirth is ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Ethics, immersion, and wisdom,\
> and the supreme freedom:\
> these things have been understood\
> by Gotama the renowned.
>
> And so the Buddha, having insight,[^397]\
> explained this teaching to the mendicants.\
> The teacher made an end of suffering,\
> seeing clearly, he is fully quenched."[^398]

And while staying there, too, he often gave this Dhamma talk to the
mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 22. The Four Great References  {#the-four-great-references .unnumbered}

When the Buddha had stayed in Wares Village as long as he pleased, he
addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to Elephant Village."...[^399]

"Let's go to Mango Village."...[^400]

"Let's go to Black Plum Village."...[^401]

"Let's go to Bhoga City."[^402]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at Bhoga City, where he stayed
at the Ānanda shrine.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, I will teach you
the four great references.[^403] Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Take a mendicant who says: 'Reverend, I have heard and learned this in
the presence of the Buddha:[^404] this is the teaching, this is the
training, this is the Teacher's instruction.'[^405] You should neither
approve nor dismiss that mendicant's statement.[^406] Instead, having
carefully memorized those words and phrases, you should make sure they
fit in the discourse and are exhibited in the training.[^407] If they do
not fit in the discourse and are not exhibited in the training, you
should draw the conclusion:[^408] 'Clearly this is not the word of the
Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by that mendicant.' And so you
should reject it. If they do fit in the discourse and are exhibited in
the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word
of the Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that mendicant.' You
should remember it. This is the first great reference.[^409]

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery lives a
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} with seniors and leaders.[^410] I've heard and
learned this in the presence of that [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: this is the
teaching, this is the training, this is the Teacher's instruction.' You
should neither approve nor dismiss that mendicant's statement. Instead,
having carefully memorized those words and phrases, you should make sure
they fit in the discourse and are exhibited in the training. If they do
not fit in the discourse and are not exhibited in the training, you
should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is not the word of the Buddha.
It has been incorrectly memorized by that [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}.' And so
you should reject it. If they do fit in the discourse and are exhibited
in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly this is the
word of the Buddha. It has been correctly memorized by that
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}.' You should remember it. This is the second great
reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there are
several senior mendicants who are very learned, inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines.[^411] I've heard and learned this in the presence of those
senior mendicants: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is
the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly
this is not the word of the Buddha. It has not been correctly memorized
by those senior mendicants.' And so you should reject it. If they do fit
in the discourse and are exhibited in the training, you should draw the
conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Buddha. It has been
correctly memorized by those senior mendicants.' You should remember it.
This is the third great reference.

Take another mendicant who says: 'In such-and-such monastery there is a
single senior mendicant who is very learned, an inheritor of the
heritage, who has memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines.[^412] I've heard and learned this in the presence of that
senior mendicant: this is the teaching, this is the training, this is
the Teacher's instruction.' You should neither approve nor dismiss that
mendicant's statement. Instead, having carefully memorized those words
and phrases, you should make sure they fit in the discourse and are
exhibited in the training. If they do not fit in the discourse and are
not exhibited in the training, you should draw the conclusion: 'Clearly
this is not the word of the Buddha. It has been incorrectly memorized by
that senior mendicant.' And so you should reject it. If they do fit in
the discourse and are exhibited in the training, you should draw the
conclusion: 'Clearly this is the word of the Buddha. It has been
correctly memorized by that senior mendicant.' You should remember it.
This is the fourth great reference.

These are the four great references."[^413]

And while staying at the Ānanda shrine, too, the Buddha often gave this
Dhamma talk to the mendicants:

"Such is ethics, such is immersion, such is wisdom. When immersion is
imbued with ethics it's very fruitful and beneficial. When wisdom is
imbued with immersion it's very fruitful and beneficial. When the mind
is imbued with wisdom it is rightly freed from the defilements, namely,
the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance."

### 23. On Cunda the Smith  {#on-cunda-the-smith .unnumbered}

When the Buddha had stayed in Bhoga City as long as he pleased, he
addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}."[^414]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants arrived at [Pāvā]{lang="sa"},[^415]
where he stayed in Cunda the smith's mango grove.[^416]

Cunda heard that the Buddha had arrived and was staying in his mango
grove. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma
talk.[^417] Then Cunda said to the Buddha, "Sir, may the Buddha together
with the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} please accept tomorrow's meal
from me." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, Cunda got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right,
before leaving.

And when the night had passed Cunda had delicious fresh and cooked foods
prepared in his own home, and plenty of pork on the turn. Then he had
the Buddha informed of the time, saying,[^418] "Sir, it's time. The meal
is ready."

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
went to the home of Cunda together with the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, where he sat on the seat spread out and addressed
Cunda, "Cunda, please serve me with the pork on the turn that you've
prepared.[^419] And serve the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} with the
other foods."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda, and did as he was asked.

Then the Buddha addressed Cunda, "Cunda, any pork on the turn that's
left over, you should bury it in a pit. I don't see anyone in this
world---with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---who
could properly digest it except for the Realized One."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda. He did as he was asked, then came back to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then the Buddha educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired him with a Dhamma talk, after which
he got up from his seat and left.

After the Buddha had eaten Cunda's meal, he fell severely ill with
bloody dysentery, struck by dreadful pains, close to death.[^420] But he
endured unbothered, with mindfulness and situational awareness. Then he
addressed Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

> I've heard that after eating[^421]\
> the meal of Cunda the smith,\
> the attentive one fell severely ill,\
> with pains, close to death.
>
> A severe sickness struck the Teacher\
> who had eaten the pork on the turn.\
> While still purging the Buddha said:\
> "I'll go to the citadel of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}."

### 24. Bringing a Drink  {#bringing-a-drink .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha left the road and went to the root of a certain tree,
where he addressed Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fold my outer robe in four
and spread it out for me. I am tired and will sit down."[^422]

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda, and did as he was asked. The Buddha sat on
the seat spread out.

When he was seated he said to Venerable Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fetch
me some water. I am thirsty and will drink."[^423]

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, just now
around five hundred carts have passed by. The shallow water has been
churned up by their wheels, and it flows cloudy and murky. The
[Kakutthā]{lang="sa"} river is not far away, with clear, sweet, cool
water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful. There the Buddha can drink
and cool his limbs."[^424]

For a second time, the Buddha asked Ānanda for a drink, and for a second
time Ānanda suggested going to the [Kakutthā]{lang="sa"} river.

And for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, fetch
me some water. I am thirsty and will drink."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his bowl he went to the river.[^425]
Now, though the shallow water in that creek had been churned up by
wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when Ānanda approached it flowed
transparent, clear, and unclouded.

Then Ānanda thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! The Realized One
has such psychic power and might! For though the shallow water in that
creek had been churned up by wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when I
approached it flowed transparent, clear, and unclouded." Gathering a
bowl of drinking water he went back to the Buddha, and said to him,
"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has such psychic
power and might! Just now, though the shallow water in that creek had
been churned up by wheels, and flowed cloudy and murky, when I
approached it flowed transparent, clear, and unclouded. Drink the water,
Blessed One! Drink the water, Holy One!" So the Buddha drank the water.

### 25. On Pukkusa the Malla  {#on-pukkusa-the-malla .unnumbered}

Now at that time Pukkusa the Malla, a disciple of [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"}
[Kālāma]{lang="sa"}, was traveling along the road from
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} to [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}.[^426] He saw the Buddha
sitting at the root of a certain tree. He went up to him, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! Those
who have gone forth remain in such peaceful meditations.

Once it so happened that [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"}, while
traveling along a road, left the road and sat at the root of a nearby
tree for the day's meditation. Then around five hundred carts passed by
right beside [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"}.[^427] Then a
certain person coming behind those carts went up to [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"}
[Kālāma]{lang="sa"} and said to him: 'Sir, didn't you see the five
hundred carts pass by?'[^428]

'No, friend, I didn't see them.'

'But sir, didn't you hear a sound?'

'No, friend, I didn't hear a sound.'

'But sir, were you asleep?'

'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.'

'But sir, were you conscious?'

'Yes, friend.' 'So, sir, while conscious and awake you neither saw nor
heard a sound as five hundred carts passed by right beside you? Why sir,
even your outer robe is covered with dust!'[^429]

'Yes, friend.'

Then that person thought: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! Those who
have gone forth remain in such peaceful meditations, in that, while
conscious and awake he neither saw nor heard a sound as five hundred
carts passed by right next to him.' And after declaring his lofty
confidence in [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"}, he left."

"What do you think, Pukkusa? Which is harder and more challenging to do
while conscious and awake: to neither see nor hear a sound as five
hundred carts pass by right next to you? Or to neither see nor hear a
sound as the heavens are raining and pouring, lightning's flashing, and
thunder's cracking?"

"What do five hundred carts matter, or six hundred, or seven hundred, or
eight hundred, or nine hundred, or a thousand, or even a hundred
thousand carts? It's far harder and more challenging to neither see nor
hear a sound as the heavens are raining and pouring, lightning's
flashing, and thunder's cracking!"

"This one time, Pukkusa, I was staying near [Ātumā]{lang="sa"} in a
threshing-hut.[^430] At that time the heavens were raining and pouring,
lightning was flashing, and thunder was cracking. And not far from the
threshing-hut two farmers who were brothers were killed, as well as four
oxen. Then a large crowd came from [Ātumā]{lang="sa"} to the place where
that happened.

Now at that time I came out of the threshing-hut and was walking
mindfully in the open near the door of the hut. Then having left that
crowd, a certain person approached me, bowed, and stood to one side. I
said to them, 'Why, friend, has this crowd gathered?'

'Just now, sir, the heavens were raining and pouring, lightning was
flashing, and thunder was cracking. And two farmers who were brothers
were killed, as well as four oxen. Then this crowd gathered here. But
sir, where were you?'

'I was right here, friend.'

'But sir, did you see?'

'No, friend, I didn't see anything.'

'But sir, didn't you hear a sound?'

'No, friend, I didn't hear a sound.'

'But sir, were you asleep?'

'No, friend, I wasn't asleep.'

'But sir, were you conscious?'

'Yes, friend.'

'So, sir, while conscious and awake you neither saw nor heard a sound as
the heavens were raining and pouring, lightning was flashing, and
thunder was cracking?'

'Yes, friend.'

Then that person thought: 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! Those who
have gone forth remain in such peaceful meditations, in that, while
conscious and awake he neither saw nor heard a sound as the heavens were
raining and pouring, lightning was flashing, and thunder was cracking.'
And after declaring their lofty confidence in me, they bowed and
respectfully circled me, keeping me on their right, before leaving."

When he said this, Pukkusa said to him, "Any confidence I had in
[Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"} I sweep away as in a strong wind,
or float away as down a swift stream. Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if
he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing
out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with
clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear
in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

Then Pukkusa addressed a certain man, "Please, my man, fetch a pair of
ready to wear garments the color of mountain gold."[^431]

"Yes, sir," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then Pukkusa
brought the garments to the Buddha, "Sir, please accept this pair of
ready to wear garments the color of mountain gold from me out of
sympathy."

"Well then, Pukkusa, clothe me in one, and Ānanda in the other."

"Yes, sir," replied Pukkusa, and did so.

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Pukkusa the
Malla with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat, bowed,
and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.

Then, not long after Pukkusa had left, Ānanda placed the pair of
garments the color of mountain gold by the Buddha's body. But when
placed by the Buddha's body they seemed to lose their shine. Then Ānanda
said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how pure and
bright is the color of the Realized One's skin. When this pair of ready
to wear garments the color of mountain gold is placed by the Buddha's
body they seem to lose their lustre."

"That's so true, Ānanda, that's so true! There are two times when the
color of the Realized One's skin becomes extra pure and bright. What
two? The night when a Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening; and the night he becomes fully extinguished in the element of
extinguishment with no residue.[^432] These are the are two times when
the color of the Realized One's skin becomes extra pure and bright.

Today, Ānanda, in the last watch of the night, between a pair of sal
trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}, shall be the Realized One's full extinguishment.
Come, Ānanda, let's go to the [Kakutthā]{lang="sa"} River."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

> A pair of garments the color of mountain gold[^433]\
> was presented by Pukkusa;\
> when the teacher was clothed with them,\
> his snow gold skin glowed bright.

Then the Buddha together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants
went to the [Kakutthā]{lang="sa"} River. He plunged into the river and
bathed and drank. And when he had emerged, he went to the mango grove,
where he addressed Venerable Cundaka,[^434] "Please, Cundaka, fold my
outer robe in four and spread it out for me. I am tired and will lie
down."

"Yes, sir," replied Cundaka, and did as he was asked. And then the
Buddha laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one
foot on top of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of
getting up. But Cundaka sat down right there in front of the Buddha.

> Having gone to [Kakutthā]{lang="sa"} Creek,[^435]\
> whose water was transparent, sweet, and clear,\
> the Teacher, being tired, plunged in,\
> the Realized One, without compare in the world.
>
> And after bathing and drinking the Teacher emerged.\
> Before the group of mendicants, in the middle,\
> \>the Buddha,\
> the Teacher\
> \>who rolled forth the present dispensation,[^436]\
> the great seer went to the mango grove.
>
> He addressed the mendicant named Cundaka:\
> "Spread out my folded robe so I can lie down."\
> The evolved one urged Cunda,\
> who quickly spread the folded robe.\
> The Teacher lay down so tired,\
> while Cunda sat there before him.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Now it may happen, Ānanda, that someone may give rise to regret in
Cunda the smith: 'It's your loss, respected Cunda, it's your misfortune,
in that the Realized One was fully quenched after eating his last
almsmeal from you.'[^437] You should dispel remorse in Cunda the smith
like this: 'You're fortunate, respected Cunda, you're so very fortunate,
in that the Realized One was fully quenched after eating his last
almsmeal from you. I have heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha.

There are two almsmeal offerings that have identical fruit and result,
and are more fruitful and beneficial than other almsmeal
offerings.[^438] What two? The almsmeal after eating which a Realized
One understands the supreme perfect awakening; and the almsmeal after
eating which he becomes fully extinguished in the element of
extinguishment with no residue. These two almsmeal offerings have
identical fruit and result, and are more fruitful and beneficial than
other almsmeal offerings.

You've accumulated a deed that leads to long life, beauty, happiness,
fame, heaven, and sovereignty.'[^439] That's how you should dispel
remorse in Cunda the smith."

Then, understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed
this heartfelt sentiment:

> "A giver's merit grows;[^440]\
> enmity doesn't build up when you have self-control.\
> A skillful person gives up bad things---\
> with the end of greed, hate, and delusion,\
> \>they're quenched."

:::: Center
::: small
*The fourth recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 26. The Pair of Sal Trees  {#the-pair-of-sal-trees .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda, let's go to the far shore
of the Golden River, and on to the sal forest of the Mallas at
Upavattana near [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}."[^441]

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. And that's where they went. Then the Buddha
addressed Ānanda, "Please, Ānanda, set up a cot for me between the twin
sal trees, with my head to the north. I am tired and will lie down."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda, and did as he was asked. And then the Buddha
laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on
top of the other---mindful and aware.[^442]

Now at that time the twin sal trees were in full blossom with flowers
out of season.[^443] They sprinkled and bestrewed the Realized One's
body in honor of the Realized One. And the flowers of the heavenly Flame
Tree fell from the sky, and they too sprinkled and bestrewed the
Realized One's body in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly
sandalwood powder fell from the sky, and it too sprinkled and bestrewed
the Realized One's body in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly music
played in midair in honor of the Realized One. And heavenly choirs sang
in midair in honor of the Realized One.

Then the Buddha pointed out to Ānanda what was happening, adding:
"That's not the full extent of how the Realized One is honored,
respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed. Any monk or nun or male or
female lay follower who practices in line with the teachings, practicing
properly, living in line with the teachings---they honor, respect,
revere, venerate, and esteem the Realized One with the highest
honor.[^444] So Ānanda, you should train like this: 'We shall practice
in line with the teachings, practicing properly, living in line with the
teaching.'"[^445]

### 27. The Monk [Upavāna]{lang="sa"}  {#the-monk-upavāna .unnumbered}

Now at that time Venerable [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} was standing in front of
the Buddha fanning him.[^446] Then the Buddha made him move, "Move over,
mendicant, don't stand in front of me."

Ānanda thought, "This Venerable [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} has been the
Buddha's attendant for a long time, close to him, living in his
presence.[^447] Yet in his final hour the Buddha makes him move, saying:
'Move over, mendicant, don't stand in front of me.' What is the cause,
what is the reason for this?"

Then Ānanda said to the Buddha, "This Venerable [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} has
been the Buddha's attendant for a long time, close to him, living in his
presence. Yet in his final hour the Buddha makes him move, saying: 'Move
over, mendicant, don't stand in front of me.' What is the cause, sir,
what is the reason for this?"

"Most of the deities from ten solar systems have gathered to see the
Realized One. For twelve leagues all around this sal grove there's no
spot, not even a fraction of a hair's tip, that's not crowded full of
illustrious deities.[^448] The deities are complaining: 'We've come such
a long way to see the Realized One! Only rarely do Realized Ones arise
in the world, perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas. This very day, in
the last watch of the night, the Realized One will be fully
extinguished. And this illustrious mendicant is standing in front of the
Buddha blocking the view. We won't get to see the Realized One in his
final hour!'"

"But sir, what kind of deities are you thinking of?"

"There are, Ānanda, deities---both in space and on the earth---who are
aware of the earth. With hair disheveled and arms raised, they fall down
like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth,
lamenting:[^449] 'Too soon the Blessed One will be fully extinguished!
Too soon the Holy One will be fully extinguished! Too soon the Eye of
the World will vanish!'[^450]

But the deities who are free of desire endure, mindful and aware,
thinking: 'Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?'"[^451]

### 28. The Four Inspiring Places  {#the-four-inspiring-places .unnumbered}

"Previously, sir, when mendicants had completed the rainy season
residence in various districts they came to see the Realized One.[^452]
We got to see the esteemed mendicants, and to pay homage to them.[^453]
But when the Buddha has passed, we won't get to see the esteemed
mendicants or to pay homage to them."

"Ānanda, a faithful gentleman should go to see these four inspiring
places.[^454] What four? Thinking: 'Here the Realized One was
born!'---that is an inspiring place.[^455] Thinking: 'Here the Realized
One became awakened as a supreme fully awakened Buddha!'---that is an
inspiring place.[^456] Thinking: 'Here the supreme Wheel of Dhamma was
rolled forth by the Realized One!'---that is an inspiring place.[^457]
Thinking: 'Here the Realized One was fully quenched in the element of
extinguishment with no residue!'---that is an inspiring place.[^458]
These are the four inspiring places that a faithful gentleman should go
to see.

Faithful monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will come, and think: 'Here
the Realized One was born!' and 'Here the Realized One became awakened
as a supreme fully awakened Buddha!' and 'Here the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma was rolled forth by the Realized One!' and 'Here the Realized One
was fully quenched in the element of extinguishment with no residue!'
Anyone who passes away while on pilgrimage to these shrines will, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm."

### 29. Ānanda's Questions  {#ānandas-questions .unnumbered}

"Sir, how do we proceed when it comes to females?"[^459]

"Without looking, Ānanda."[^460]

"But when looking, how to proceed?"[^461]

"Without chatting, Ānanda."[^462]

"But when chatting, how to proceed?"[^463]

"Be mindful, Ānanda."[^464]

"Sir, how do we proceed when it comes to the Realized One's
corpse?"[^465]

"Don't get involved in the rites for venerating the Realized One's
corpse, Ānanda.[^466] Please, Ānanda, you must all strive and practice
for your own goal! Meditate diligent, keen, and resolute for your own
goal![^467] There are astute aristocrats, brahmins, and householders who
are devoted to the Realized One. They will perform the rites for
venerating the Realized One's corpse."

"But sir, how to proceed when it comes to the Realized One's corpse?"

"Proceed in the same way as they do for the corpse of a wheel-turning
monarch."

"But how do they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's corpse?"

"They wrap a wheel-turning monarch's corpse with unworn cloth, then with
uncarded cotton, then again with unworn cloth. In this way they wrap the
corpse with five hundred double-layers. Then they place it in an iron
case filled with oil and close it up with another case. Then, having
built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of aromatics, they cremate the
corpse.[^468] They build a monument for the wheel-turning monarch at the
crossroads.[^469] That's how they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's
corpse. Proceed in the same way with the Realized One's corpse.[^470] A
monument for the Realized One is to be built at the crossroads. When
someone there lifts up garlands or fragrance or powder, or bows, or
inspires confidence in their heart, that will be for their lasting
welfare and happiness.

### 30. Persons Worthy of Monument  {#persons-worthy-of-monument .unnumbered}

Ānanda, these four are worthy of a monument. What four? A Realized One,
a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; an independent Buddha; a
disciple of a Realized One; and a wheel-turning monarch.

And for what reason is a Realized One worthy of a monument? So that many
people will inspire confidence in their hearts, thinking: 'This is the
monument for that Blessed One, perfected and fully awakened!' And having
done so, when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason that a Realized One
is worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is an independent Buddha worthy of a monument?[^471]
So that many people will inspire confidence in their hearts, thinking:
'This is the monument for that independent Buddha!' And having done so,
when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm. It is for this reason that an independent Buddha is
worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is a Realized One's disciple worthy of a
monument?[^472] So that many people will inspire confidence in their
hearts, thinking: 'This is the monument for that Blessed One's
disciple!' And having done so, when their body breaks up, after death,
they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason
that a Realized One's disciple is worthy of a monument.

And for what reason is a wheel-turning monarch worthy of a monument? So
that many people will inspire confidence in their hearts, thinking:
'This is the monument for that just and principled king!'[^473] And
having done so, when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. It is for this reason that a
wheel-turning monarch is worthy of a monument.

These four are worthy of a monument."

### 31. Ānanda's Incredible Qualities  {#ānandas-incredible-qualities .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda entered a building, and stood there leaning
against the door-jamb and crying,[^474] "Oh! I'm still only a trainee
with work left to do; and my Teacher is about to be fully extinguished,
he who is so kind to me!"[^475]

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, where is Ānanda?"

"Sir, Ānanda has entered a dwelling, and stands there leaning against
the door-jamb and crying: 'Oh! I'm still only a trainee with work left
to do; and my Teacher is about to be fully extinguished, he who is so
kind to me!'"

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
Ānanda that the teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Ānanda and said to him,
"Reverend Ānanda, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Ānanda replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Enough, Ānanda! Do not grieve, do not lament. Did I not prepare for
this when I explained that[^476] we must be parted and separated from
all we hold dear and beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is
born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out,
even the Realized One's body? For a long time, Ānanda, you've treated
the Realized One with deeds of body, speech, and mind that are loving,
beneficial, pleasant, undivided, and limitless.[^477] You have done good
deeds, Ānanda. Devote yourself to meditation, and you will soon be free
of defilements."[^478]

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"The Buddhas of the past or the future have attendants who are no better
than Ānanda is for me.[^479] Ānanda is astute, he is intelligent. He
knows the time for monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, king's ministers,
monastics of other religions and their disciples to visit the Realized
One.[^480]

There are these four incredible and amazing things about Ānanda.[^481]
What four? If an assembly of monks goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted
by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls
silent, they've never had enough. If an assembly of nuns ... laymen ...
or laywomen goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing him and
uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never
had enough. These are the four incredible and amazing things about
Ānanda.

There are these four incredible and amazing things about a wheel-turning
monarch.[^482] What four? If an assembly of aristocrats goes to see a
wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by
hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never had enough.
If an assembly of brahmins ... householders ... or ascetics goes to see
a wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by
hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

In the same way, there are those four incredible and amazing things
about Ānanda."

### 32. Teaching the Discourse on [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}  {#teaching-the-discourse-on-mahāsudassana .unnumbered}

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, please don't be fully extinguished in this little hamlet, this
jungle hamlet, this branch hamlet. There are other great cities such as
[Campā]{lang="sa"}, [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"},
[Sāketa]{lang="sa"}, [Kosambī]{lang="sa"}, and Varanasi.[^483] Let the
Buddha be fully extinguished there. There are many well-to-do
aristocrats, brahmins, and householders there who are devoted to the
Buddha. They will perform the rites of venerating the Realized One's
corpse."

"Don't say that Ānanda! Don't say that this is a little hamlet, a jungle
hamlet, a branch hamlet.

Once upon a time there was a king named [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} who
was a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion
extended to all four sides, he achieved stability in the country, and he
possessed the seven treasures.[^484] His capital was this
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}, which at the time was named
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"}.[^485] It stretched for twelve leagues from east
to west, and seven leagues from north to south.[^486] The royal capital
of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} was successful, prosperous, populous, full of
people, with plenty of food. It was just like [Āḷakamandā]{lang="sa"},
the royal capital of the gods, which is successful, prosperous,
populous, full of spirits, with plenty of food.[^487]
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} was never free of ten sounds by day or night,
namely: the sound of elephants, horses, chariots, drums, clay drums,
arched harps, singing, horns, gongs, and handbells; and the cry: 'Eat,
drink, be merry!' as the tenth.

Go, Ānanda, into [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} and inform the Mallas: 'This very
day, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, in the last watch of the night, the
Realized One will be fully extinguished.[^488] Come forth,
[Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}! Come forth, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}! Don't regret
it later, thinking: 'The Realized One became fully extinguished in our
own village district, but we didn't get a chance to see him in his final
hour.'"

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Then he robed up and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} with a companion.[^489]

### 33. The Mallas Pay Homage  {#the-mallas-pay-homage .unnumbered}

Now at that time the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} were sitting
together at the town hall on some business.[^490] Ānanda went up to
them, and announced: "This very day, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, in the last
watch of the night, the Realized One will be fully extinguished. Come
forth, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}! Come forth, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}! Don't
regret it later, thinking: 'The Realized One became fully extinguished
in our own village district, but we didn't get a chance to see him in
his final hour.'"

When they heard what Ānanda had to say, the Mallas, their sons,
daughters-in-law, and wives became distraught, saddened, and
grief-stricken. And some, with hair disheveled and arms raised, falling
down like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented,
"Too soon the Blessed One will be fully extinguished! Too soon the Holy
One will be fully extinguished! Too soon the Eye of the World will
vanish!"

Then the Mallas, their sons, daughters-in-law, and wives, distraught,
saddened, and grief-stricken went to the Mallian sal grove at Upavattana
and approached Ānanda.

Then Ānanda thought, "If I have the Mallas pay homage to the Buddha one
by one, they won't be finished before first light. I'd better separate
them family by family and then have them pay homage, saying: 'Sir, the
Malla named so-and-so with children, wives, retinue, and ministers bows
with his head at your feet.'" And so that's what he did. So by this
means Ānanda got the Mallas to finish paying homage to the Buddha in the
first watch of the night.

### 34. On Subhadda the Wanderer  {#on-subhadda-the-wanderer .unnumbered}

Now at that time a wanderer named Subhadda was residing near
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}.[^491] He heard that on that very day, in the last
watch of the night, will be the full extinguishment of the ascetic
Gotama. He thought: "I have heard that brahmins of the past who were
elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'Only rarely do Realized
Ones arise in the world, perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas.' And
this very day, in the last watch of the night, will be the full
extinguishment of the ascetic Gotama. This state of uncertainty has come
up in me. I am quite confident that the Buddha is capable of teaching me
so that I can give up this state of uncertainty."

Then Subhadda went to the Mallian sal grove at Upavattana, approached
Ānanda, and said to him, "Master Ānanda, I have heard that brahmins of
the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'Only
rarely do Realized Ones arise in the world, perfected ones, fully
awakened Buddhas.' And this very day, in the last watch of the night,
will be the full extinguishment of the ascetic Gotama. This state of
uncertainty has come up in me. I am quite confident that the Buddha is
capable of teaching me so that I can give up this state of uncertainty.
Mister Ānanda, please let me see the ascetic Gotama."

When he had spoken, Ānanda said, "Enough, Reverend Subhadda, do not
trouble the Realized One. He is tired."

For a second time, and a third time, Subhadda asked Ānanda, and a third
time Ānanda refused.

The Buddha heard that discussion between Ānanda and Subhadda. He said to
Ānanda, "Enough, Ānanda, don't obstruct Subhadda; let him see the
Realized One. For whatever he asks me, he will only be looking to
understand, not to trouble me. And he will quickly understand any answer
I give to his question."

So Ānanda said to the wanderer Subhadda, "Go, Reverend Subhadda, the
Buddha is making time for you."

Then the wanderer Subhadda went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, there are those ascetics and brahmins who lead an order
and a community, and tutor a community. They're well-known and famous
religious founders, deemed holy by many people. Namely:
[Pūraṇa]{lang="sa"} Kassapa, the bamboo-staffed ascetic
[Gosāla]{lang="sa"}, Ajita of the hair blanket, Pakudha
[Kaccāyana]{lang="sa"}, [Sañjaya]{lang="sa"} [Belaṭṭhiputta]{lang="sa"},
and the Jain ascetic of the [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} clan. According to their
own claims, did all of them have direct knowledge, or none of them, or
only some?"[^492]

"Enough, Subhadda, let that be.[^493] I shall teach you the Dhamma.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Subhadda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Subhadda, in whatever teaching and training the noble eightfold path is
not found, there is no ascetic found, no second ascetic, no third
ascetic, and no fourth ascetic.[^494] In whatever teaching and training
the noble eightfold path is found, there is an ascetic found, a second
ascetic, a third ascetic, and a fourth ascetic.[^495] In this teaching
and training the noble eightfold path is found. Only here is there an
ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third ascetic, and here a fourth
ascetic. Other sects are empty of ascetics.

Were these mendicants to practice well, the world would not be empty of
perfected ones.[^496]

> I was twenty-nine years of age, Subhadda,[^497]\
> when I went forth to discover what is skillful.[^498]\
> It's been over fifty years\
> since I went forth.\
> Teacher of the references\
> \>for the systematic teaching:[^499]\
> outside of here there is no ascetic,

no second ascetic, no third ascetic, and no fourth ascetic. Other sects
are empty of ascetics. Were these mendicants to practice well, the world
would not be empty of perfected ones."

When he had spoken, Subhadda said to the Buddha, "Excellent, sir!
Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made
the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. Sir, may I receive
the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

"Subhadda, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take
the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into monkhood. However, I have recognized individual differences in this
matter."

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

Then the Buddha said to Ānanda, "Well then, Ānanda, give Subhadda the
going forth."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

Then Subhadda said to Ānanda, "You're so fortunate, Reverand Ānanda, so
very fortunate, to be anointed here in the Teacher's presence as his
pupil!" And the wanderer Subhadda received the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination,
Venerable Subhadda, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Subhadda became one of the perfected. He
was the last personal disciple of the Buddha.[^500]

:::: Center
::: small
*The fifth recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 35. The Buddha's Last Words  {#the-buddhas-last-words .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Ānanda:

"Now, Ānanda, some of you might think: 'The teacher's dispensation has
passed. Now we have no Teacher.' But you should not see it like this.
The teaching and training that I have taught and pointed out for you
shall be your Teacher after my passing.[^501]

After my passing, mendicants ought not address each other as 'reverend',
as they do today.[^502] A more senior mendicant ought to address a more
junior mendicant by name or clan, or by saying 'reverend'. A more junior
mendicant ought to address a more senior mendicant using 'sir' or
'venerable'.[^503]

If it wishes, after my passing the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} may abolish the
lesser and minor training rules.[^504]

After my passing, give the divine punishment to the mendicant
Channa."[^505]

"But sir, what is the divine punishment?"

"Channa may say what he likes, but the mendicants should not correct,
advise, or instruct him."[^506]

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Perhaps even a single mendicant
has doubt or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the path, or the practice. So ask, mendicants!
Don't regret it later, thinking: 'We were in the Teacher's presence and
we weren't able to ask the Buddha a question.'"

When this was said, the mendicants kept silent.

For a second time, and a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Buddha, the teaching, the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the path, or the
practice. So ask, mendicants! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'We were
in the Teacher's presence and we weren't able to ask the Buddha a
question.'"

For a third time, the mendicants kept silent. Then the Buddha said to
the mendicants,

"Mendicants, perhaps you don't ask out of respect for the Teacher. So
let a friend tell a friend."

When this was said, the mendicants kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! I am quite confident that there is not even a single mendicant
in this [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} who has doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Buddha, the teaching, the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the path, or the
practice."

"Ānanda, you speak out of faith. But the Realized One knows that there
is not even a single mendicant in this [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} who has doubt
or uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the path, or the practice. Even the last of these
five hundred mendicants is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening."

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants: "Come now, mendicants, I say to
you all: 'Conditions fall apart. Persist with diligence.'"

These were the Realized One's last words.[^507]

### 36. Fully Quenched  {#fully-quenched .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha entered the first absorption. Emerging from that, he
entered the second absorption. Emerging from that, he successively
entered into and emerged from the third absorption, the fourth
absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, and the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. Then he entered the cessation of
perception and feeling.[^508]

Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Anuruddha, "Honorable Anuruddha,
has the Buddha become fully quenched?"[^509]

"No, Reverend Ānanda. He has entered the cessation of perception and
feeling."

Then the Buddha emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling and
entered the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. Emerging
from that, he successively entered into and emerged from the dimension
of nothingness, the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension
of infinite space, the fourth absorption, the third absorption, the
second absorption, and the first absorption. Emerging from that, he
successively entered into and emerged from the second absorption and the
third absorption. Then he entered the fourth absorption. Emerging from
that the Buddha immediately became fully extinguished.

When the Buddha was fully quenched, along with the full extinguishment
there was a great earthquake, awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky. When the Buddha was fully quenched, the
divinity Sahampati recited this verse:

> "All creatures in this world[^510]\
> must lay down this bag of bones.[^511]\
> For even a Teacher such as this,\
> unrivaled in the world,\
> the Realized One, attained to power,\
> the Buddha was fully quenched."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Sakka, lord of gods, recited this
verse:

> "Oh! Conditions are impermanent,[^512]\
> their nature is to rise and fall;\
> having arisen, they cease;\
> their stilling is blissful."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Venerable Anuruddha recited this
verse:

> "There was no more breathing[^513]\
> for the unaffected one of steady heart.\
> Imperturbable, committed to peace,\
> the sage has done his time.
>
> He put up with painful feelings\
> without flinching.\
> The liberation of his heart\
> was like the extinguishing of a lamp."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, Venerable Ānanda recited this verse:

> "Then there was terror![^514]\
> Then they had goosebumps!\
> When the Buddha, endowed with all fine qualities,\
> became fully quenched."

When the Buddha was fully quenched, some of the mendicants there who
were not free of desire, with arms raised, falling down like their feet
were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented: "Too soon the
Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy One has become
fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has vanished!"[^515] But
the mendicants who were free of desire endured, mindful and aware,
thinking, "Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?"

Then Anuruddha addressed the mendicants: "Enough, reverends, do not
grieve or lament. Did the Buddha not prepare us for this when he
explained that we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and
beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is born, created,
conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out? The deities are
complaining."

"But sir, what kind of deities are you thinking of?"

"There are, Ānanda, deities---both in space and on the earth---who are
aware of the earth. With hair disheveled and arms raised, they fall down
like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamenting:
'Too soon the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy
One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has
vanished!' But the deities who are free of desire endure, mindful and
aware, thinking: 'Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?'"

Ānanda and Anuruddha spent the rest of the night talking about Dhamma.

Then Anuruddha said to Ānanda, "Go, Ānanda, into [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}
and inform the Mallas: '[Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, the Buddha has become
fully quenched. Please come at your convenience.'"

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Then, in the morning, he robed up and,
taking his bowl and robe, entered [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} with a
companion.

Now at that time the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} were sitting
together at the town hall still on the same business.[^516] Ānanda went
up to them, and announced, "[Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, the Buddha has
become fully quenched. Please come at your convenience."

When they heard what Ānanda had to say, the Mallas, their sons,
daughters-in-law, and wives became distraught, saddened, and
grief-stricken. And some, with hair disheveled and arms raised, falling
down like their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented,
"Too soon the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy
One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has
vanished!"

### 37. The Rites of Venerating the Buddha's Corpse  {#the-rites-of-venerating-the-buddhas-corpse .unnumbered}

Then the Mallas ordered their men, "So then, my men, collect fragrances
and garlands, and all the musical instruments in [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}."

Then---taking those fragrances and garlands, all the musical
instruments, and five hundred pairs of garments---they went to the
Mallian sal grove at Upavattana and approached the Buddha's corpse. They
spent the day honoring, respecting, revering, and venerating the
Buddha's corpse with dance and song and music and garlands and
fragrances, and making awnings and setting up pavilions.[^517]

Then they thought, "It's too late to cremate the Buddha's corpse today.
Let's do it tomorrow." But they spent the next day the same way, and so
too the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days.[^518]

Then on the seventh day they thought, "Honoring, respecting, revering,
and venerating the Buddha's corpse with dance and song and music and
garlands and fragrances, let us carry it to the south of the town, and
cremate it there outside the town."

Now at that time eight of the leading Mallas, having bathed their heads
and dressed in unworn clothes, said,[^519] "We shall lift the Buddha's
corpse." But they were unable to do so.

The Mallas said to Anuruddha, "What is the cause, Honorable Anuruddha,
what is the reason why these eight Mallian chiefs are unable to lift the
Buddha's corpse?"

"[Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, you have one plan, but the deities have a
different one."

"But sir, what is the deities' plan?"

"You plan to carry the Buddha's corpse to the south of the town while
venerating it with dance and song and music and garlands and fragrances,
and cremate it there outside the town. The deities plan to carry the
Buddha's corpse to the north of the town while venerating it with
heavenly dance and song and music and garlands and fragrances. Then they
plan to enter the town by the northern gate, carry it through the center
of the town, leave by the eastern gate, and cremate it there at the
Mallian shrine named Coronation."[^520]

"Sir, let it be as the deities plan."

Now at that time the whole of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} was covered
knee-deep with the flowers of the Flame Tree, without gaps even on the
filth and rubbish heaps.[^521] Then the deities and the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} carried the Buddha's corpse to the north of the
town while venerating it with heavenly and human dance and song and
music and garlands and fragrances. Then they entered the town by the
northern gate, carried it through the center of the town, left by the
eastern gate, and deposited the corpse there at the Mallian shrine named
Coronation.

Then the Mallas said to Ānanda, "Honorable Ānanda, how do we proceed
when it comes to the Realized One's corpse?"

"Proceed in the same way as they do for the corpse of a wheel-turning
monarch."

"But how do they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's corpse?"

"They wrap a wheel-turning monarch's corpse with unworn cloth, then with
uncarded cotton, then again with unworn cloth. In this way they wrap the
corpse with five hundred double-layers. Then they place it in an iron
case filled with oil and close it up with another case. Then, having
built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of aromatics, they cremate the
corpse. They build a monument for the wheel-turning monarch at the
crossroads. That's how they proceed with a wheel-turning monarch's
corpse. Proceed in the same way with the Realized One's corpse. A
monument for the Realized One is to be built at the crossroads. When
someone there lifts up garlands or fragrance or powder, or bows, or
inspires confidence in their heart, that will be for their lasting
welfare and happiness."

Then the Mallas ordered their men, "So then, my men, collect uncarded
cotton."

So the Mallas wrapped the Buddha's corpse, and placed it in an iron case
filled with oil. Then, having built a funeral pyre out of all kinds of
aromatics, they lifted the corpse on to the pyre.

### 38. [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"}'s Arrival  {#mahākassapas-arrival .unnumbered}

Now at that time Venerable [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} was traveling along
the road from [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} to [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} together with a
large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five hundred mendicants.[^522] Then he left
the road and sat at the root of a tree.

Now at that time a certain [Ājīvaka]{lang="sa"} ascetic had picked up a
Flame Tree flower in [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} and was traveling along the
road to [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}.[^523] [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} saw him coming
off in the distance and said to him, "Reverend, might you know about our
Teacher?"

"Yes, reverend. Seven days ago the ascetic Gotama was fully quenched.
From there I picked up this Flame Tree flower." Some of the mendicants
there who were not free of desire, with arms raised, falling down like
their feet were chopped off, rolling back and forth, lamented, "Too soon
the Blessed One has become fully quenched! Too soon the Holy One has
become fully quenched! Too soon the Eye of the World has vanished!" But
the mendicants who were free of desire endured, mindful and aware,
thinking, "Conditions are impermanent. How could it possibly be
otherwise?"

Now at that time a monk named Subhadda, who had gone forth when old, was
sitting in that assembly. He said to those mendicants, "Enough,
reverends, do not grieve or lament. We're well rid of that Great
Ascetic. And we are oppressed:[^524] 'This is allowable for you; this is
not allowable for you.' Well, now we shall do what we want and not do
what we don't want."

Then Venerable [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} addressed the mendicants,
"Enough, reverends, do not grieve or lament. Did the Buddha not prepare
us for this when he explained that we must be parted and separated from
all we hold dear and beloved? How could it possibly be so that what is
born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out,
even the Realized One's body?"

Now at that time four of the leading Mallas, having bathed their heads
and dressed in unworn clothes, said, "We shall light the Buddha's
funeral pyre." But they were unable to do so.

The Mallas said to Anuruddha, "What is the cause, Venerable Anuruddha,
what is the reason why these four Mallian chiefs are unable to light the
Buddha's funeral pyre?"

"[Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}, the deities have a different plan."

"But sir, what is the deities' plan?"

"The deities' plan is this: Venerable [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} is
traveling along the road from [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} to [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}
together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five hundred mendicants.
The Buddha's funeral pyre shall not burn until he bows with his head at
the Buddha's feet."

"Sir, let it be as the deities plan."

Then Venerable [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} arrived at the Mallian shrine
named Coronation at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} and approached the Buddha's
funeral pyre. Arranging his robe over one shoulder and raising his
joined palms, he respectfully circled the Buddha three times, keeping
him on his right, and bowed with his head at the Buddha's feet. And the
five hundred mendicants did likewise. And when [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"}
and the five hundred mendicants bowed the Buddha's funeral pyre burst
into flames all by itself.

And when the Buddha's corpse was cremated no ash or soot was found from
outer or inner skin, flesh, sinews, or synovial fluid. Only the relics
remained.[^525] It's like when ghee or oil blaze and burn, and neither
ashes nor soot are found. In the same way, when the Buddha's corpse was
cremated no ash or soot was found from outer or inner skin, flesh,
sinews, or synovial fluid. Only the relics remained. And of those five
hundred pairs of garments only two were not burnt: the innermost and the
outermost. But when the Buddha's corpse was consumed the funeral pyre
was extinguished by a stream of water that appeared in the sky,[^526] by
water dripping from the sal trees, and by the Mallas' fragrant water.

Then the Mallas made a cage of spears for the Buddha's relics in the
town hall and surrounded it with a buttress of bows. For seven days they
honored, respected, revered, and venerated them with dance and song and
music and garlands and fragrances.

### 39. Distributing the Relics  {#distributing-the-relics .unnumbered}

King [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} of Magadha, son of the princess of Videha,
heard[^527] that the Buddha had become fully quenched at
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. He sent an envoy to the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat and so am I. I too
deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. I will build a monument for them
and conduct a memorial service."[^528]

The Licchavis of [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} also heard that the Buddha had
become fully quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy to
the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat and
so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will build
a monument for them and conduct a memorial service."

The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also heard that the Buddha had become fully
quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was our foremost relative. We too
deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will build a monument for
them and conduct a memorial service."

The Bulis of Allakappa also heard[^529] that the Buddha had become fully
quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat and so are we. We
too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will build a monument for
them and conduct a memorial service."

The Koliyans of [Rāmagāma]{lang="sa"} also heard[^530] that the Buddha
had become fully quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy
to the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat
and so are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will
build a monument for them and conduct a memorial service."

The brahmin of [Veṭhadīpa]{lang="sa"} also heard[^531] that the Buddha
had become fully quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. He sent an envoy to
the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat and I
am a brahmin. I too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. I will build
a monument for them and conduct a memorial service."

The Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} also heard that the Buddha had become
fully quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy to the
Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat and so
are we. We too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will build a
monument for them and conduct a memorial service."

When they had spoken, the Mallas of [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} said to those
various groups: "The Buddha was fully quenched in our village district.
We will not give away a share of his relics."[^532]

Then [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} the brahmin said to those various groups:[^533]

> "Hear, sirs, a single word from me.\
> Our Buddha's teaching was acceptance.\
> It would not be good to fight over[^534]\
> a share of the supreme person's relics.
>
> Let us make eight portions, good sirs,\
> rejoicing in unity and harmony.\
> Let there be monuments far and wide,[^535]\
> so many folk may gain faith in the Clear-eyed One!"

"Well then, brahmin, you yourself should fairly divide the Buddha's
relics in eight portions."

"Yes, sirs," replied [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} to those various groups. He
divided the relics as asked and said to them, "Sirs, please give me the
urn, and I shall build a monument for it and conduct a memorial
service." So they gave [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} the urn.

The Moriyas of Pippalivana heard[^536] that the Buddha had become fully
quenched at [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}. They sent an envoy to the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}: "The Buddha was an aristocrat, and so are we. We
too deserve a share of the Buddha's relics. We will build a monument for
them and conduct a memorial service."

"There is no portion of the Buddha's relics left, they have already been
portioned out. Here, take the embers." So they took the embers.

### 40. Venerating the Relics  {#venerating-the-relics .unnumbered}

Then King [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} of Magadha,[^537] the Licchavis of
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu, the Bulis of
Allakappa, the Koliyans of [Rāmagāma]{lang="sa"}, the brahmin of
[Veṭhadīpa]{lang="sa"}, the Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}, the Mallas of
[Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}, the brahmin [Doṇa]{lang="sa"}, and the Moriyas of
Pippalivana built monuments for them and conducted memorial services.
Thus there were eight monuments for the relics, a ninth for the urn, and
a tenth for the embers. That is how it was in the old days.[^538]

> There were eight shares\
> \>of the Clear-eyed One's relics.[^539]\
> Seven were worshipped in the Black Plum Tree Land.\
> But one share of the most excellent of men\
> was worshipped in [Rāmagāma]{lang="sa"} by a dragon king.
>
> One tooth is venerated\
> \>by the gods of the Three and Thirty,\
> and one is worshipped in the city of [Gandhāra]{lang="sa"};\
> another one in the realm of the [Kaliṅga]{lang="sa"} King,\
> and one is worshipped by a dragon king.
>
> Through their glory this rich earth\
> is adorned with the best of offerings.[^540]\
> Thus the Clear-eyed One's corpse\
> is well honored by the honorable.
>
> It's venerated by lords of gods, dragons, and spirits;\
> and likewise venerated by the finest lords of men.\
> Honor it with joined palms when you get the chance,\
> for a Buddha is rare even in a hundred eons.
>
> Altogether forty even teeth,\
> and the body hair and head hair,\
> were carried off individually by gods\
> across the universe.

## N 17 King Mahāsudassana  *Mahāsudassanasutta* {#n-17-king-mahāsudassana-mahāsudassanasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
between a pair of sal trees in the sal forest of the Mallas at
Upavattana near [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} at the time of his full
extinguishment.[^541]

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, please don't be fully extinguished in this
little hamlet, this jungle hamlet, this branch hamlet. There are other
great cities such as [Campā]{lang="sa"}, [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"},
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}, [Sāketa]{lang="sa"}, [Kosambī]{lang="sa"}, and
Varanasi. Let the Buddha be fully extinguished there. There are many
well-to-do aristocrats, brahmins, and householders there who are devoted
to the Buddha. They will perform the rites of venerating the Realized
One's corpse."

"Don't say that, Ānanda! Don't say that this is a little hamlet, a
jungle hamlet, a branch hamlet.

### 1. The Capital City of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"}  {#the-capital-city-of-kusāvatī .unnumbered}

Once upon a time there was a king named [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} whose
dominion extended to all four sides, and who achieved stability in the
country. His capital was this [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}, which at the time
was named [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"}. It stretched for twelve leagues from
east to west, and seven leagues from north to south. The royal capital
of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} was successful, prosperous, populous, full of
people, with plenty of food. It was just like [Āḷakamandā]{lang="sa"},
the royal capital of the gods, which is successful, prosperous,
populous, full of spirits, with plenty of food.

[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} was never free of ten sounds by day or night,
namely: the sound of elephants, horses, chariots, drums, clay drums,
arched harps, singing, horns, gongs, and handbells; and the cry, 'Eat,
drink, be merry!' as the tenth.

[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} was encircled by seven ramparts:[^542] one made of
gold, one made of silver, one made of beryl, one made of crystal, one
made of ruby, one made of emerald, and one made of all precious things.

It had four gates, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. At each
gate there were seven pillars, three fathoms deep and four fathoms
high,[^543] made of gold, silver, beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all
precious things.

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees, made of gold, silver,
beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things. The golden palms
had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver. The silver palms
had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. The beryl palms had
trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal. The crystal palms had
trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. The ruby palms had
trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald. The emerald palms had
trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby. The palms of all
precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits
of all precious things. When those rows of palm trees were blown by the
wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and
intoxicating, like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had
practiced well and kept excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or
drunkards in [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} at that time were entertained by that
sound.[^544]

### 2. The Seven Treasures  {#the-seven-treasures .unnumbered}

#### 2.1. The Wheel-Treasure  {#the-wheel-treasure .unnumbered}

King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} possessed seven treasures and four
blessings. What seven?

On a fifteenth day sabbath, King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} had bathed
his head and gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the
sabbath.[^545] And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to him, with a
thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every detail.[^546]
Seeing this, the king thought, 'I have heard that when the heavenly
wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?'

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}, rising from his seat and arranging
his robe over one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and
besprinkled the wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying:[^547] 'Roll
forth, O wheel-treasure! Triumph, O wheel-treasure!'

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed
it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with
his army.[^548]

And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to him and said,
'Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king,
instruct us.'

The king said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not
commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the
current level of taxation.'[^549] And so the opposing rulers of the
eastern quarter became his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolled towards the south. ...[^550]

Having plunged into the southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the west. ...

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four
divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the
king came to stay together with his army.

And any opposing rulers of the northern quarter came to him and said,
'Come, great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king,
instruct us.'

The king said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not
commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the
current level of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the northern
quarter became his vassals.[^551]

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the
gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle,
illuminating the royal compound.[^552] Such is the wheel-treasure that
appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.2. The Elephant-Treasure  {#the-elephant-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the elephant-treasure appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.
It was an all-white sky-walker with psychic power, touching the ground
in seven places, a king of elephants named Sabbath.[^553] Seeing him,
the king was impressed, 'This would truly be a fine elephant vehicle, if
he would submit to taming.' Then the elephant-treasure submitted to
taming, as if he was a fine thoroughbred elephant that had been tamed
for a long time.

Once it so happened that King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}, testing that
same elephant-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the
land surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time
for breakfast. Such is the elephant-treasure that appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.3. The Horse-Treasure  {#the-horse-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the horse-treasure appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}. It
was an all-white sky-walker with psychic power, with head of black and
mane like woven reeds, a royal steed named Thundercloud.[^554] Seeing
him, the king was impressed, 'This would truly be a fine horse vehicle,
if he would submit to taming.' Then the horse-treasure submitted to
taming, as if he was a fine thoroughbred horse that had been tamed for a
long time.

Once it so happened that King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}, testing that
same horse-treasure, mounted him in the morning and traversed the land
surrounded by ocean before returning to the royal capital in time for
breakfast. Such is the horse-treasure that appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.4. The Jewel-Treasure  {#the-jewel-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the jewel-treasure appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}. It
was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful, eight-faceted,
well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed with all good
qualities. And the radiance of that jewel spread all-round for a league.

Once it so happened that King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}, testing that
same jewel-treasure, mobilized his army of four divisions and, with the
jewel hoisted on his banner, set out in the dark of the night. Then the
villagers around them set off to work, thinking that it was day. Such is
the jewel-treasure that appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.5. The Woman-Treasure  {#the-woman-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the woman-treasure appeared to King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.
She was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. She was
neither too tall nor too short; neither too thin nor too fat; neither
too dark nor too light. She outdid human beauty without reaching
heavenly beauty. And her touch was like a tuft of cotton-wool or kapok.
When it was cool her limbs were warm, and when it was warm her limbs
were cool. The fragrance of sandal floated from her body, and lotus from
her mouth. She got up before the king and went to bed after him, and was
obliging, behaving nicely and speaking politely. The woman-treasure did
not betray the wheel-turning monarch even in thought, still less in
deed. Such is the woman-treasure that appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.6. The Householder-Treasure  {#the-householder-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the householder-treasure appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}. The power of clairvoyance manifested in him
as a result of past deeds, by which he sees hidden treasure, both owned
and ownerless.

He approached the king and said, 'Relax, sire. I will take care of the
treasury.'

Once it so happened that the wheel-turning monarch, testing that same
householder-treasure, boarded a boat and sailed to the middle of the
Ganges river. Then he said to the householder-treasure, 'Householder, I
need gold, both coined and uncoined.'

'Well then, great king, draw the boat up to one shore.'

'It's right here, householder, that I need gold, both coined and
uncoined.'

Then that householder-treasure, immersing both hands in the water,
pulled up a pot full of gold, both coined and uncoined, and said to the
king, 'Is this sufficient, great king? Has enough been done, great king,
enough offered?'

The king said, 'That is sufficient, householder. Enough has been done,
enough offered.'

Such is the householder-treasure that appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

#### 2.7. The Commander-Treasure  {#the-commander-treasure .unnumbered}

Next, the commander-treasure appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}. He was astute, competent, intelligent, and
capable of getting the king to appoint who should be appointed, dismiss
who should be dismissed, and retain who should be retained.[^555]

He approached the king and said, 'Relax, sire. I shall issue
instructions.'

Such is the commander-treasure that appeared to King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

These are the seven treasures possessed by King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

### 3. The Four Blessings  {#the-four-blessings .unnumbered}

King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} possessed four blessings. And what are
the four blessings?

He was attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty, more so
than other people. This is the first blessing.

Furthermore, he was long-lived, more so than other people. This is the
second blessing.

Furthermore, he was rarely ill or unwell, and his stomach digested well,
being neither too hot nor too cold, more so than other people. This is
the third blessing.

Furthermore, he was as dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders
as a father is to his children. And the brahmins and householders were
as dear to the king as children are to their father.

Once it so happened that King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} went with his
army of four divisions to visit a park. Then the brahmins and
householders went up to him and said, 'Slow down, Your Majesty, so we
may see you longer!' And the king addressed his charioteer, 'Drive
slowly, charioteer, so I can see the brahmins and householders longer!'
This is the fourth blessing.

These are the four blessings possessed by King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

### 4. Lotus Ponds in the Palace of Principle  {#lotus-ponds-in-the-palace-of-principle .unnumbered}

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I have lotus
ponds built between the palms, at intervals of a hundred bow lengths?'

So that's what he did. The lotus ponds were lined with tiles of four
colors, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

And four flights of stairs of four colors descended into each lotus
pond, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had
posts of gold, and banisters and finials of silver. The silver stairs
had posts of silver, and banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs
had posts of beryl, and banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal
stairs had posts of crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl. Those
lotus ponds were surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver.
The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of
silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and
finials of gold.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I plant flowers
in the lotus ponds such as blue water lilies, and lotuses of pink,
yellow, and white, blooming all year round, and accessible to the
public?' So that's what he did.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I appoint bath
attendants to help bathe the people who come to bathe in the lotus
ponds?' So that's what he did.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I set up
charities on the banks of the lotus ponds, so that those in need of
food, drink, clothes, vehicles, beds, women, coined gold, or uncoined
gold can get what they need?'[^556] So that's what he did.

Then the brahmins and householders came to the king bringing abundant
wealth and said,[^557] 'Sire, this abundant wealth is specially for you
alone; may Your Highness accept it!'

'There's enough raised for me through regular taxes. Let this be for
you; and here, take even more!'

When the king turned them down, they withdrew to one side to think up a
plan, 'It wouldn't be proper for us to take this abundant wealth back to
our own homes. Why don't we build a home for King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}?'

They went up to the king and said, 'We shall have a home built for you,
sire!' King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} consented with silence.

And then Sakka, lord of gods, knowing the king's train of thought,
addressed the god Vissakamma, 'Come, dear Vissakamma, build a palace
named Principle as a home for King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.'[^558]

'Yes, lord,' replied Vissakamma. Then, as easily as a strong person
would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the gods of the
thirty-three and appeared in front of King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

Vissakamma said to the king, 'I shall build a palace named Principle as
a home for you, sire.' King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} consented with
silence.

And so that's what Vissakamma did.

The Palace of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and
half a league from north to south. It was lined with tiles of four
colors, three fathoms high, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had 84,000 pillars of four colors, made of gold, silver, beryl, and
crystal. It was covered with panels of four colors, made of gold,
silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors, made of gold, silver,
beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters
and finials of silver. The silver stairs had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and
banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal stairs had posts of
crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

It had 84,000 chambers of four colors,[^559] made of gold, silver,
beryl, and crystal. In each chamber a couch was spread: in the golden
chamber a couch of silver; in the silver chamber a couch of gold; in the
beryl chamber a couch of ivory; in the crystal chamber a couch of
hardwood. At the door of the golden chamber stood a palm tree of silver,
with trunk of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. At the door of the
silver chamber stood a palm tree of gold, with trunk of gold, and leaves
and fruits of silver. At the door of the beryl chamber stood a palm tree
of crystal, with trunk of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. At
the door of the crystal chamber stood a palm tree of beryl, with trunk
of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I build a grove
of golden palm trees at the door to the great foyer, where I can sit for
the day?' So that's what he did.

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold
and silver. The golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and
finials of silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold.

The Palace of Principle was surrounded by two nets of bells, made of
gold and silver. The golden net had bells of silver, and the silver net
had bells of gold. When those nets of bells were blown by the wind they
sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and intoxicating, like
a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had practiced well and kept
excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or drunkards in
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} at that time were entertained by that sound. When
it was finished, the palace was hard to look at, dazzling to the eyes.
It was like how in the last month of the rainy season, in autumn, when
the heavens are clear and cloudless, as the sun is rising to the
firmament, it is hard to look at, dazzling to the eyes.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Why don't I build a lotus
pond named Principle in front of the palace?' So that's what he did. The
Lotus Pond of Principle stretched for a league from east to west, and
half a league from north to south. It was lined with tiles of four
colors, made of gold, silver, beryl, and crystal.

It had twenty-four staircases of four colors, made of gold, silver,
beryl, and crystal. The golden stairs had posts of gold, and banisters
and finials of silver. The silver stairs had posts of silver, and
banisters and finials of gold. The beryl stairs had posts of beryl, and
banisters and finials of crystal. The crystal stairs had posts of
crystal, and banisters and finials of beryl.

It was surrounded by two balustrades, made of gold and silver. The
golden balustrades had posts of gold, and banisters and finials of
silver. The silver balustrades had posts of silver, and banisters and
finials of gold.

It was surrounded by seven rows of palm trees, made of gold, silver,
beryl, crystal, ruby, emerald, and all precious things. The golden palms
had trunks of gold, and leaves and fruits of silver. The silver palms
had trunks of silver, and leaves and fruits of gold. The beryl palms had
trunks of beryl, and leaves and fruits of crystal. The crystal palms had
trunks of crystal, and leaves and fruits of beryl. The ruby palms had
trunks of ruby, and leaves and fruits of emerald. The emerald palms had
trunks of emerald, and leaves and fruits of ruby. The palms of all
precious things had trunks of all precious things, and leaves and fruits
of all precious things. When those rows of palm trees were blown by the
wind they sounded graceful, tantalizing, sensuous, lovely, and
intoxicating, like a quintet made up of skilled musicians who had
practiced well and kept excellent rhythm. And any addicts, carousers, or
drunkards in [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} at that time were entertained by that
sound.

When the palace and its lotus pond were finished, King
[Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} served those who were deemed true ascetics
and brahmins with all they desired. Then he ascended the Palace of
Principle.

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section.*
:::
::::

### 5. Attaining Absorption  {#attaining-absorption .unnumbered}

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'Of what deed of mine is
this the fruit and result, that I am now so mighty and powerful?'

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'It is the fruit and
result of three kinds of deeds:[^560] giving, self-control, and
restraint.'

Then he went to the great foyer, stood at the door, and expressed this
heartfelt sentiment:[^561] 'Stop here, sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts---[^562] no further!'

Then he entered the great foyer and sat on the golden couch. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
entered and remained in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected.[^563] As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected
were stilled, he entered and remained in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with
the fading away of rapture, he entered and remained in the third
absorption, where he meditated with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the giving up of
pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, he
entered and remained in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} left the great foyer and entered
the golden chamber, where he sat on the golden couch. He meditated
spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and
to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way he spread a heart full
of love above, below, across, everywhere, all around, to everyone in the
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. He
meditated spreading a heart full of compassion ... He meditated
spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... He meditated spreading a heart
full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.

### 6. Of All Cities  {#of-all-cities .unnumbered}

King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} had 84,000 cities, with the royal
capital of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} foremost. He had 84,000 palaces, with
the Palace of Principle foremost. He had 84,000 chambers, with the great
foyer foremost. He had 84,000 couches made of gold, silver, ivory, and
hardwood. They were spread with woollen covers---shag-piled, pure white,
or embroidered with flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a
canopy above and red pillows at both ends.[^564] He had 84,000 bull
elephants with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold
netting, with the royal bull elephant named Sabbath foremost. He had
84,000 horses with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold
netting, with the royal steed named Thundercloud foremost. He had 84,000
chariots upholstered with the hide of lions, tigers, and leopards, and
cream rugs, with gold adornments and banners, covered with snow gold
netting, with the chariot named Triumph foremost.[^565] He had 84,000
jewels, with the jewel-treasure foremost. He had 84,000 women, with
Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} foremost. He had 84,000 householders, with
the householder-treasure foremost. He had 84,000 aristocrat vassals,
with the commander-treasure foremost. He had 84,000 milk-cows with
silken reins and bronze pails.[^566] He had 8,400,000,000 fine cloths of
linen, cotton, silk, and wool. He had 84,000 servings of food, which
were presented to him as offerings in the morning and evening.

Now at that time his 84,000 royal elephants came to attend on him in the
morning and evening. Then King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} thought, 'What
if instead half of the elephants took turns to attend on me at the end
of each century?'[^567] He instructed the commander-treasure to do this,
and so it was done.

### 7. The Visit of Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"}  {#the-visit-of-queen-subhaddā .unnumbered}

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} thought, 'It is long since I have
seen the king. Why don't I go to see him?'

So the queen addressed the ladies of the harem, 'Come, bathe your heads
and dress in yellow. It is long since we saw the king, and we shall go
to see him.'

'Yes, ma'am,' replied the ladies of the harem. They did as she asked and
returned to the queen.

Then the queen addressed the commander-treasure, 'Dear
commander-treasure, please ready the army of four divisions. It is long
since we saw the king, and we shall go to see him.'

'Yes, my queen,' he replied, and did as he was asked. He informed the
queen, 'My queen, the army of four divisions is ready, please go at your
convenience.'

Then Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} together with the ladies of the harem
went with the army to the Palace of Principle. She ascended the palace
and went to the great foyer, where she stood leaning against a
door-post.[^568]

Hearing them, the king thought, 'What's that, it sounds like a big
crowd!' Coming out of the foyer he saw Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"}
leaning against a door-post and said to her, 'Please stay there, my
queen, don't enter in here.'[^569]

Then he addressed a certain man, 'Come, mister, bring the golden couch
from the great foyer and set it up in the golden palm grove.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' that man replied, and did as he was asked. The king
laid down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on
top of the other---mindful and aware.

Then Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} thought, 'The king's faculties are so
very clear, and the complexion of his skin is pure and bright. Let him
not pass away!' She said to him,[^570] 'Sire, you have 84,000 cities,
with the royal capital of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} foremost. Arouse desire
for these! Take an interest in life!'[^571]

And she likewise urged the king to live on by taking an interest in all
his possessions as described above.

When the queen had spoken, the king said to her, 'For a long time, my
queen, you have spoken to me with words that are welcome, desirable,
agreeable, and pleasant. And yet in my final hour, your words are
unwelcome, undesirable, disagreeable, and unpleasant!'[^572]

'Then how exactly, Your Majesty, am I to speak to you?'

'Like this, my queen: "Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we
hold dear and beloved. Don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is
suffering, and it's criticized.[^573] Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with
the royal capital of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} foremost. Give up desire for
these! Take no interest in life!"' And so on for all the king's
possessions.

When the king had spoken, Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} cried and burst
out in tears.[^574] Wiping away her tears, the queen said to the king:
'Sire, we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and
beloved. Don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering, and
it's criticized. Sire, you have 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} foremost. Give up desire for these! Take no
interest in life!' And she continued, listing all the king's
possessions.

### 8. Rebirth in the Realm of Divinity {#rebirth-in-the-realm-of-divinity .unnumbered}

Not long after that, King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} passed away. And
the feeling he had close to death was like a householder or their child
falling asleep after eating a delectable meal.[^575]

When he passed away King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} was reborn in a good
place, a realm of divinity. Ānanda, King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}
played children's games for 84,000 years. He ruled as viceroy for 84,000
years. He ruled as king for 84,000 years. He led the spiritual life as a
layman in the Palace of Principle for 84,000 years. And having developed
the four divine meditations, when his body broke up, after death, he was
reborn in a good place, a realm of divinity.

Now, Ānanda, you might think: 'Surely King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}
must have been someone else at that time?' But you should not see it
like that. I myself was King [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} at that
time.[^576]

Mine were the 84,000 cities, with the royal capital of
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} foremost. And mine were all the other possessions.

Of those 84,000 cities, I only stayed in one, the capital
[Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"}. Of those 84,000 mansions, I only dwelt in one,
the Palace of Principle. Of those 84,000 chambers, I only dwelt in the
great foyer. Of those 84,000 couches, I only used one, made of gold or
silver or ivory or heartwood. Of those 84,000 bull elephants, I only
rode one, the royal bull elephant named Sabbath. Of those 84,000 horses,
I only rode one, the royal horse named Thundercloud. Of those 84,000
chariots, I only rode one, the chariot named Triumph. Of those 84,000
women, I was only served by one, a maiden of the aristocratic or peasant
classes.[^577] Of those 8,400,000,000 cloths, I only wore one pair, made
of fine linen, cotton, silk, or wool. Of those 84,000 servings of food,
I only had one, eating at most a cup of rice with suitable sauce.

See, Ānanda! All those conditioned phenomena have passed, ceased, and
perished. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable are conditions, so
unreliable are conditions. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Six times, Ānanda, I recall having laid down my body at this place. And
the seventh time was as a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled
king, at which time my dominion extended to all four sides, I achieved
stability in the country, and I possessed the seven treasures. But
Ānanda, I do not see any place in this world with its gods,
[Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans where the Realized One would lay down
his body for the eighth time."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Oh! Conditions are impermanent,\
> their nature is to rise and fall;\
> having arisen, they cease;\
> their stilling is blissful."

## N 18 With Janavasabha  *Janavasabhasutta* {#n-18-with-janavasabha-janavasabhasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. Declaring the Rebirths of People From [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} and Elsewhere  {#declaring-the-rebirths-of-people-from-ñātika-and-elsewhere .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying at
[Ñātika]{lang="sa"} in the brick house.[^578]

Now at that time the Buddha was explaining the rebirths of devotees all
over the nations; the [Kāsis]{lang="sa"} and Kosalans, Vajjis and
Mallas, [Cetīs]{lang="sa"} and Vacchas, Kurus and [Pañcālas]{lang="sa"},
Macchas and [Sūrasenas]{lang="sa"}:[^579]

"This one was reborn here, while that one was reborn there.

Over fifty devotees in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away having ended
the five lower fetters. They've been reborn spontaneously, and will be
extinguished there, not liable to return from that world.[^580]

More than ninety devotees in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away having
ended three fetters, and weakened greed, hate, and delusion. They're
once-returners, who will come back to this world once only, then make an
end of suffering.

More than five hundred devotees in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} have passed away
having ended three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

When the devotees of [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} heard about the Buddha's
answers to those questions, they became uplifted and overjoyed, full of
rapture and happiness.

Venerable Ānanda heard of the Buddha's statements and the
[Ñātikans]{lang="sa"}' happiness.

### 2. Ānanda's Suggestion  {#ānandas-suggestion .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "But there were also Magadhan
devotees---many, and of long standing too---who have passed away.[^581]
You'd think that [Aṅga]{lang="sa"} and Magadha were empty of devotees
who have passed away! But they too had confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and had fulfilled their ethics.
The Buddha hasn't declared their passing. It would be good to do so, for
many people would gain confidence, and so be reborn in a good place.

That King Seniya [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"} of Magadha was a just and
principled king who benefited the brahmins and householders, and people
of town and country.[^582] People still sing his praises: 'That just and
principled king, who made us so happy, has passed away. Life was good
under his dominion.'[^583] He too had confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and had fulfilled his ethics.
People say: 'Until his dying day, King [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"} sang the
Buddha's praises!'[^584] The Buddha hasn't declared his passing. It
would be good to do so, for many people would gain confidence, and so be
reborn in a good place.

Besides, the Buddha was awakened in Magadha;[^585] so why hasn't he
declared the rebirth of the Magadhan devotees? If he fails to do so,
they will be dejected."

After pondering the fate of the Magadhan devotees alone in private,
Ānanda rose at the crack of dawn and went to see the Buddha. He bowed,
sat down to one side, and told the Buddha of his concerns, finishing by
saying, "Why hasn't the Buddha declared the rebirth of the Magadhan
devotees? If he fails to do so, they will be dejected." Then Ānanda,
after making this suggestion regarding the Magadhan devotees, got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.[^586]

Soon after Ānanda had left, the Buddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, entered [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} for alms. He
wandered for alms in [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}. After the meal, on his return
from almsround, he washed his feet and entered the brick house. He paid
attention, applied the mind, and concentrated wholeheartedly on the fate
of Magadhan devotees, and sat on the seat spread out, thinking,[^587] "I
shall know their destiny, where they are reborn in the next life." And
he saw where they had been reborn.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat. Emerging
from the brick house, he sat on the seat spread out in the shade of the
porch.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, you look so serene; your face seems to
shine owing to the clarity of your faculties. Have you been abiding in a
peaceful meditation today, sir?"

The Buddha then recounted what had happened since speaking to Ānanda,
revealing that he had seen the destiny of the Magadhan devotees. He
continued:

### 3. Janavasabha the Spirit  {#janavasabha-the-spirit .unnumbered}

"Then, Ānanda, a vanished spirit called out: 'I am Janavasabha, Blessed
One! I am Janavasabha, Holy One!' Ānanda, do you recall having
previously heard such a name as Janavasabha?"[^588]

"No, sir. But when I heard the word, I got goosebumps! I thought, 'This
must be no ordinary spirit to bear such an exalted name as
Janavasabha.'"[^589]

"After making himself heard while vanished, Ānanda, a very beautiful
spirit appeared in front of me.[^590] And for a second time he called
out: 'I am [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}, Blessed One! I am
[Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}, Holy One! This is the seventh time I am reborn
in the company of the Great King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}. When I pass
away from here, I can become a king of men.[^591]

> Seven from here, seven from there---\
> fourteen transmigrations in all.[^592]\
> I remember these lives\
> where I lived before.

For a long time I've known that I won't be reborn in the underworld, but
that I still hope to become a once-returner.'[^593]

'It's incredible and amazing that you, the venerable spirit Janavasabha,
should say:

"For a long time I've been aware that I won't be reborn in the
underworld" and also "But I still hope to become a once-returner." But
from what source do you know that you've achieved such a high
distinction?'[^594]

'None other than the Blessed One's instruction! None other than the Holy
One's instruction![^595] From the day I had absolute devotion to the
Buddha I have known that I won't be reborn in the underworld, but that I
still hope to become a once-returner. Just now, sir, I had been sent out
by the great king [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} to the great king
[Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"}'s presence on some business, and on the way I saw
the Buddha giving his attention to the fate of the Magadhan devotees.
But it comes as no surprise that I have heard and learned the fate of
the Magadhan devotees in the presence of the great king
[Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} as he was speaking to his assembly. It occurred
to me, "I shall see the Buddha and inform him of this." These are the
two reasons I've come to see the Buddha.

### 4. The Council of the Gods  {#the-council-of-the-gods .unnumbered}

Sir, it was more than a few days ago---on the fifteenth day sabbath on
the full moon day at the entry to the rainy season---when all the gods
of the thirty-three were sitting together in the Hall of Justice.[^596]
A large assembly of gods was sitting all around, and the four great
kings were seated at the four quarters.[^597]

The Great King [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"} was seated to the east, facing
west, in front of his gods. The Great King [Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"} was
seated to the south, facing north, in front of his gods. The Great King
[Virūpakkha]{lang="sa"} was seated to the west, facing east, in front of
his gods. The Great King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} was seated to the north,
facing south, in front of his gods. When the gods of the thirty-three
have a gathering like this, that is how they are seated. After that come
our seats.

Sir, those gods who had been recently reborn in the company of the
thirty-three after leading the spiritual life under the Buddha outshone
the other gods in beauty and glory. The gods of the thirty-three became
uplifted and overjoyed at that, full of rapture and happiness, saying,
"The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!"

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, celebrated with these
verses:

> "The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching."

The gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and overjoyed at
that, saying: "The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!"

Then the gods of the thirty-three, having considered and deliberated on
the matter for which they were seated together in the Hall of Justice,
advised and instructed the four great kings on the subject. Each one,
having been advised, stood at his own seat without departing.[^598]

> The Kings were instructed,\
> and heeded good advice.\
> With clear and peaceful minds,\
> they stood by their own seats.

Then in the northern quarter a magnificent light arose and radiance
appeared, surpassing the glory of the gods.[^599] Then Sakka, lord of
gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three, "As indicated by the
signs---light arising and radiance appearing---The Divinity will appear.
For this is the precursor for the appearance of the Divinity, namely
light arising and radiance appearing."

> As indicated by the signs,\
> The Divinity will appear.\
> For this is the sign of the Divinity:\
> a light vast and great.

### 5. On [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}  {#on-sanaṅkumāra .unnumbered}

Then the gods of the thirty-three sat in their own seats, saying, "We
shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have
realized it shall we go to it."[^600] And the four great kings did
likewise.

Hearing that, the gods of the thirty-three agreed in unison, "We shall
find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it
shall we go to it."

When the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} appears to the gods of the
thirty-three, he does so after manifesting in a solid life-form.[^601]
For a Divinity's normal appearance is imperceptible in the visual range
of the gods of the thirty-three.[^602] When the divinity
[Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} appears to the gods of the thirty-three, he
outshines the other gods in beauty and glory, as a golden statue
outshines the human form.[^603]

When the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} appears to the gods of the
thirty-three, not a single god in that assembly greets him by bowing
down or rising up or inviting him to a seat. They all sit silently on
their couches with their joined palms raised, thinking, "Now the
divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} will sit on the couch of whatever god
he chooses." And the god on whose couch the Divinity sits is overjoyed
and brimming with happiness, like a king on the day of his coronation.

Then the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} manifested in a solid
life-form, taking on the appearance of the youth
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, and appeared to the gods of the
thirty-three.[^604] Rising into the air, he sat cross-legged in the sky,
like a strong man might sit cross-legged on a well-appointed couch or on
level ground. Seeing the joy of those gods, the divinity
[Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} celebrated with these verses:

> "The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!"

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}
spoke.[^605] And while he was speaking on that topic, his voice had
eight qualities: it was clear, comprehensible, charming, audible, lucid,
undistorted, deep, and resonant.[^606] He makes sure his voice is
intelligible as far as the assembly goes, but the sound doesn't extend
outside the assembly. When someone has a voice like this, they're said
to have the voice of the Divinity.

Then the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}, having manifested
thirty-three life-forms, sat down on the couches of each of the gods of
the thirty-three and addressed them, "What do the good gods of the
thirty-three think? How the Buddha has acted for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans![^607] For consider those who
have gone for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and have fulfilled their ethics. When their bodies
break up, after death, some are reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others, some with the gods who love to
imagine, some with the joyful gods, some with the gods of Yama, some
with the gods of the thirty-three, and some with the gods of the four
great kings.[^608] And at the very least they swell the hosts of the
centaurs."

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And hearing the sound of the Divinity speaking on that topic, the gods
fancied, "The one sitting on my couch is the only one speaking."

> When one is speaking,\
> all the forms speak.\
> When one sits in silence,\
> they all remain silent.
>
> But those gods imagine---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> that the one on their seat\
> is the only one to speak.

Next the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} merged into one corporeal
form. Then he sat on the couch of Sakka, lord of gods, and addressed the
gods of the thirty-three:[^609]

### 6. Developing the Bases of Psychic Power  {#developing-the-bases-of-psychic-power .unnumbered}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha---are the four bases of psychic power! They are taught
for the amplification, burgeoning, and transformation of psychic
power.[^610] What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort.
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that
has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. They develop
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active
effort. These are the four bases of psychic power taught by the Buddha
for the amplification, burgeoning, and transformation of psychic power.

All the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or present who wield
the many kinds of psychic power do so by developing and cultivating
these four bases of psychic power. Gentlemen, do you see such psychic
might and power in me?"

"Yes, Great Divinity."

"I too became so mighty and powerful by developing and cultivating these
four bases of psychic power."

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 7. The Three Openings  {#the-three-openings .unnumbered}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well understood by
the Buddha are the three opportunities for achieving happiness![^611]
What three?

First, take someone who lives mixed up with sensual pleasures and
unskillful qualities.[^612] After some time they hear the teaching of
the noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and
practice accordingly. They live aloof from sensual pleasures and
unskillful qualities.[^613] That gives rise to pleasure, and more than
pleasure, happiness,[^614] like the joy that's born from gladness. This
is the first opportunity for achieving happiness.

Next, take someone whose coarse physical, verbal, and mental processes
have not died down.[^615] After some time they hear the teaching of the
noble ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and
practice accordingly. Their coarse physical, verbal, and mental
processes die down. That gives rise to pleasure, and more than pleasure,
happiness, like the joy that's born from gladness. This is the second
opportunity for achieving happiness.

Next, take someone who doesn't truly understand what is skillful and
what is unskillful,[^616] what is blameworthy and what is blameless,
what should be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is
inferior and what is superior, and what is on the side of dark and the
side of bright. After some time they hear the teaching of the noble
ones, rationally apply the mind to how it applies to them, and practice
accordingly. They truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful, and so on. Knowing and seeing like this, ignorance is given
up and knowledge arises. That gives rise to pleasure, and more than
pleasure, happiness, like the joy that's born from gladness. This is the
third opportunity for achieving happiness.

These are the three opportunities for achieving happiness that have been
understood by the Buddha."

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 8. Mindfulness Meditation  {#mindfulness-meditation .unnumbered}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Buddha are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation! They are taught
for achieving what is skillful.[^617] What four?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body
internally---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. As they meditate in this way, they become
rightly immersed in that, and rightly serene. Then they give rise to
knowledge and vision of other people's bodies externally.[^618]

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally ... Then they
give rise to knowledge and vision of other people's feelings externally.

They meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally ... Then they
give rise to knowledge and vision of other people's minds externally.

They meditate observing an aspect of principles internally---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
As they meditate in this way, they become rightly immersed in that, and
rightly serene. Then they give rise to knowledge and vision of other
people's principles externally.

These are the four kinds of mindfulness meditation taught by the Buddha
for achieving what is skillful."

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And having spoken about that, he addressed the gods of the thirty-three:

### 9. Seven Prerequisites of Immersion  {#seven-prerequisites-of-immersion .unnumbered}

"What do the good gods of the thirty-three think? How well described by
the Buddha are the seven prerequisites of immersion for the development
and fulfillment of right immersion![^619] What seven? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and
right mindfulness. Unification of mind with these seven factors as
prerequisites is what is called noble right immersion 'with its vital
conditions' and also 'with its prerequisites'.

Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to
right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right action
gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right
effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness
gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right
knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom.[^620]

If anything should be rightly described as 'a teaching that's well
explained by the Buddha, apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves; and the doors to freedom from death are flung
open,' it's this.[^621] For the teaching is well explained by the
Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves---and the doors to freedom from death are flung open.

Whoever has experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and has the ethical conduct loved by the noble
ones; and whoever is spontaneously reborn, and is trained in the
teaching; more than 2,400,000 such Magadhan devotees have passed away
having ended three fetters. They're stream-enterers, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.[^622] And there are
once-returners here, too.

> And as for the rest of folk,[^623]\
> who I think have shared in merit---\
> I couldn't even number them,\
> for fear of speaking falsely."

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And while he was speaking on that topic, this thought came to the great
king [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! That
there should be such a magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent
exposition of the teaching! And that such achievements of high
distinction should be made known!"

And then the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}, knowing the great king
[Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}'s train of thought, said to him, "What does Great
King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} think? In the past, too, there was such a
magnificent Teacher, and such a magnificent exposition of the teaching!
And such achievements of high distinction were made known![^624] In the
future, too, there will be such a magnificent Teacher, and such a
magnificent exposition of the teaching! And such achievements of high
distinction will be made known!"

That, sir, is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}
spoke to the gods of the thirty-three. And the great king
[Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}, having heard and learned it in the presence of
the Divinity as he was speaking on that topic, informed his own
assembly.'"[^625]

And the spirit Janavasabha, having heard and learned it in the presence
of the great king [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} as he was speaking on that
topic to his own assembly, informed the Buddha. And the Buddha, having
heard and learned it in the presence of the spirit Janavasabha, and also
from his own direct knowledge, informed Venerable Ānanda. And Venerable
Ānanda, having heard and learned it in the presence of the Buddha,
informed the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.[^626] And that's how
this spiritual life has become successful and prosperous, extensive,
popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans.[^627]

## N 19 The Great Steward  *Mahāgovindasutta* {#n-19-the-great-steward-mahāgovindasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then, late at night, the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, lighting up
the entire Vulture's Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one
side, and said to him,[^628] "Sir, I would tell you of what I heard and
learned directly from the gods of the thirty-three."

"Tell me, [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}," said the Buddha.

### 1. The Council of the Gods  {#the-council-of-the-gods-1 .unnumbered}

"Sir, it was more than a few days ago---on the fifteenth day sabbath on
the full moon day at the invitation to admonish held at the end of the
rainy season---when all the gods of the thirty-three were sitting
together in the Hall of Justice.[^629] A large assembly of gods was
sitting all around, and the four great kings were seated at the four
quarters.

The Great King [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"} was seated to the east, facing
west, in front of his gods. The Great King [Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"} was
seated to the south, facing north, in front of his gods. The Great King
[Virūpakkha]{lang="sa"} was seated to the west, facing east, in front of
his gods. The Great King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} was seated to the north,
facing south, in front of his gods.

When the gods of the thirty-three have a gathering like this, that is
how they are seated. After that come our seats.

Sir, those gods who had been recently reborn in the company of the
thirty-three after leading the spiritual life under the Buddha outshine
the other gods in beauty and glory. The gods of the thirty-three became
uplifted and overjoyed at that, full of rapture and happiness, saying,
'The heavenly hosts swell, while the titan hosts dwindle!'

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, celebrated with these
verses:

> 'The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!'

The gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and overjoyed at
that, full of rapture and happiness, saying, 'The heavenly hosts swell,
while the titan hosts dwindle!'

### 2. Eight Genuine Praises  {#eight-genuine-praises .unnumbered}

Seeing the joy of those gods, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed them,
'Gentlemen, would you like to hear eight genuine praises of the
Buddha?'[^630]

'Indeed we would, sir.'

Then Sakka proffered these eight genuine praises of the Buddha:[^631]

'What do the good gods of the thirty-three think?[^632] How the Buddha
has acted for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans! I don't see any Teacher, past or present, who has such sympathy
for the world, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has explained the teaching well---apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves. I don't see any
Teacher, past or present, who explains such a relevant teaching, apart
from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has well described what is skillful and what is
unskillful,[^633] what is blameworthy and what is blameless, what should
be cultivated and what should not be cultivated, what is inferior and
what is superior, and what is on the side of dark and the side of
bright. I don't see any Teacher, past or present, who so clearly
describes all these things, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has well described the practice that leads to
extinguishment for his disciples. And extinguishment converges with the
practice,[^634] as the waters of the Ganges come together and converge
with the waters of the Yamuna.[^635] I don't see any Teacher, past or
present, who so clearly describes the practice that leads to
extinguishment for his disciples, apart from the Buddha.

Also, possessions and popularity have accrued to the Buddha, so much
that you'd think it would thrill even the aristocrats. But he takes his
food free of vanity.[^636] I don't see any Teacher, past or present, who
takes their food so free of vanity, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has gained companions, both trainees who are
practicing, and those with defilements ended who have completed their
journey.[^637] The Buddha is committed to the joy of solitude, but
doesn't send them away.[^638] I don't see any Teacher, past or present,
so committed to the joy of solitude, apart from the Buddha.

Also, the Buddha does as he says, and says as he does, thus: he does as
he says, and says as he does.[^639] I don't see any Teacher, past or
present, who so practices in line with the teaching, apart from the
Buddha.

Also, the Buddha has gone beyond doubt and got rid of indecision. He has
achieved all he wished for regarding the fundamental purpose of the
spiritual life.[^640] I don't see any Teacher, past or present, who has
achieved these things, apart from the Buddha.'

These are the eight genuine praises of the Buddha proffered by Sakka.
Hearing them, the gods of the thirty-three became even more uplifted and
overjoyed.

Then some gods thought, 'If only four fully awakened Buddhas might arise
in the world and teach the Dhamma, just like the Blessed One! That would
be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the
world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!'

Other gods thought, 'Let alone four fully awakened Buddhas; if only
three fully awakened Buddhas, or two fully awakened Buddhas might arise
in the world and teach the Dhamma, just like the Blessed One! That would
be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the
world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!'

When they said this, Sakka said, 'It is impossible, gentlemen, for two
perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system
at the same time.[^641] May that Blessed One be healthy and well, and
remain with us for a long time![^642] That would be for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans!'

Then the gods of the thirty-three, having considered and deliberated on
the matter for which they were seated together in the Hall of Justice,
advised and instructed the four great kings on the subject. Each one,
having been advised, stood at his own seat without departing.

> The Kings were instructed,\
> and heeded good advice.\
> With clear and peaceful minds,\
> they stood by their own seats.

Then in the northern quarter a magnificent light arose and radiance
appeared, surpassing the glory of the gods. Then Sakka, lord of gods,
addressed the gods of the thirty-three, 'As indicated by the
signs---light arising and radiance appearing---the Divinity will appear.
For this is the precursor for the appearance of the Divinity, namely
light arising and radiance appearing.'

> As indicated by the signs,\
> the Divinity will appear.\
> For this is the sign of the Divinity:\
> a light vast and great.

### 3. On [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}  {#on-sanaṅkumāra-1 .unnumbered}

Then the gods of the thirty-three sat in their own seats, saying, 'We
shall find out what has caused that light, and only when we have
realized it shall we go to it.' And the four great kings did likewise.
Hearing that, the gods of the thirty-three agreed in unison, 'We shall
find out what has caused that light, and only when we have realized it
shall we go to it.'

When the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} appears to the gods of the
thirty-three, he does so after manifesting in a solid corporeal form.
For a Divinity's normal appearance is imperceptible in the visual range
of the gods of the thirty-three. When the divinity
[Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} appears to the gods of the thirty-three, he
outshines the other gods in beauty and glory, as a golden statue
outshines the human form. When the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}
appears to the gods of the thirty-three, not a single god in that
assembly greets him by bowing down or rising up or inviting him to a
seat. They all sit silently on their couches with their joined palms
raised, thinking, 'Now the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} will sit on
the couch of whatever god he chooses.' And the god on whose couch the
Divinity sits is overjoyed and brimming with happiness, like a king on
the day of his coronation.

Seeing the joy of those gods, the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}
celebrated with these verses:

> 'The gods rejoice---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching;
>
> and seeing the new gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> who have come here after leading\
> the spiritual life under the Buddha!
>
> They outshine the others\
> in beauty, glory, and lifespan.\
> Here are the distinguished disciples\
> of he whose wisdom is vast.
>
> Seeing this, they delight---\
> the thirty-three with their Lord---\
> revering the Realized One,\
> and the natural excellence of the teaching!'

That is the topic on which the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} spoke.
And while he was speaking on that topic, his voice had eight qualities:
it was clear, comprehensible, charming, audible, lucid, undistorted,
deep, and resonant. He makes sure his voice is intelligible as far as
the assembly goes, but the sound doesn't extend outside the assembly.
When someone has a voice like this, they're said to have the voice of
the Divinity.

Then the gods of the thirty-three said to the divinity
[Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}, 'Good, Great Divinity! Having appraised this,
we rejoice.[^643] And there are the eight genuine praises of the Buddha
spoken by Sakka---having appraised them, too, we rejoice.'

### 4. Eight Genuine Praises  {#eight-genuine-praises-1 .unnumbered}

Then the Divinity said to Sakka, 'It would be good, lord of gods, if I
could also hear the eight genuine praises of the Buddha.'

Saying, 'Yes, Great Divinity,' Sakka repeated the eight genuine praises
for him.

Hearing them, the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} was uplifted and
overjoyed, full of rapture and happiness. Then the divinity
[Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} manifested in a solid corporeal form, taking on
the appearance of the youth [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, and appeared to the
gods of the thirty-three. Rising into the air, he sat cross-legged in
the sky, like a strong man might sit cross-legged on a well-appointed
couch or on level ground. There he addressed the gods of the
thirty-three:

### 5. The Story of the Steward  {#the-story-of-the-steward .unnumbered}

'What do the gods of the thirty-three think about the extent of the
Buddha's great wisdom?

Once upon a time, there was a king named Disampati.[^644] He had a
brahmin high priest named the Steward.[^645] Disampati's son was the
prince named [Reṇu]{lang="sa"},[^646] while the Steward's son was the
student named [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}.[^647] There were [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}
the prince, [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"} the student, and six other
aristocrats; these eight became friends.

In due course the brahmin Steward passed away. At his passing, King
Disampati lamented, "At a time when I have relinquished all my duties to
the brahmin Steward and amuse myself, supplied and provided with the
five kinds of sensual stimulation, he passes away!"[^648]

When he said this, Prince [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} said to him, "Sire, don't
lament too much at the Steward's passing. He has a son named
[Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}, who is even more astute and expert than his
father. He should manage the affairs that were managed by his father."

"Is that so, my prince?"

"That is so, sire."

### 6. The Story of the Great Steward  {#the-story-of-the-great-steward .unnumbered}

So King Disampati addressed one of his men, "Please, mister, go to the
student [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}, and say to him, 'Best wishes,
[Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}! You are summoned by King Disampati; he wants to
see you.'"

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then
[Jotipāla]{lang="sa"} went to the king and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and the king said to him, "May you, [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}, manage
my affairs---please don't turn me down! I shall appoint you to your
father's position, and anoint you as Steward."[^649]

"Yes, sir," replied [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}.

So the king anointed him as Steward and appointed him to his father's
position. After his appointment, the Steward [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"}
managed both the affairs that his father had managed, and other affairs
that his father had not managed.[^650] He organized both the works that
his father had organized, and other works that his father had not
organized. When people noticed this they said, "The brahmin is indeed a
Steward, a Great Steward!" And that's how the student
[Jotipāla]{lang="sa"} came to be known as the Great Steward.

#### 6.1. Dividing the Realm  {#dividing-the-realm .unnumbered}

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "King
Disampati is old, elderly and senior, advanced in years, and has reached
the final stage of life. Who knows how long he has to live? It's likely
that when he passes away the king-makers will anoint Prince
[Reṇu]{lang="sa"} as king. Come, sirs, go to Prince [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}
and say, 'Prince [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}, we are your friends, dear, beloved,
and cherished. We have shared your joys and sorrows. King Disampati is
old, elderly and senior, advanced in years, and has reached the final
stage of life. Who knows how long he has to live? It's likely that when
he passes away the king-makers will anoint you as king. If you should
gain kingship, share it with us.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the six aristocrats. They went to Prince
[Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and put the proposal to him.

The prince replied, "Who else, sirs, in my realm ought to prosper if not
you?[^651] If I gain kingship, I will share it with you all."

In due course King Disampati passed away. At his passing, the
king-makers anointed Prince [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} as king. But after being
anointed, King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} amused himself, supplied and provided
with the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "King
Disampati has passed away. But after being anointed, King
[Reṇu]{lang="sa"} amused himself, supplied and provided with the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. Who knows the intoxicating power of
sensual pleasures? Come, sirs, go to Prince [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and say,
'Sir, King Disampati has passed away, and you have been anointed as
king. Do you remember what you said?'"

"Yes, sir," replied the six aristocrats. They went to King
[Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and said, "Sir, King Disampati has passed away, and
you have been anointed as king. Do you remember what you said?"

"I remember, sirs. Who is able to neatly divide into seven equal parts
this great land, so broad in the north and narrow as the front of a cart
in the south?"[^652]

"Who else, sir, if not the Great Steward?"

So King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} addressed one of his men, "Please, mister, go
to the brahmin Great Steward and say that King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} summons
him."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied that man, and did as he was asked. Then the
Great Steward went to the king and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and the king said to him, "Come, let the good Steward neatly
divide into seven equal parts this great land, so broad in the north and
narrow as the front of a cart in the south."

"Yes, sir," replied the Great Steward, and did as he was asked. All were
arranged like the fronts of carts,[^653] and right in the middle was
King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}'s nation.[^654]

> Dantapura for the [Kaliṅgas]{lang="sa"};[^655]\
> Potana for the Assakas;[^656]\
> [Māhissatī]{lang="sa"} for the Avantis;[^657]\
> Roruka for the [Sovīras]{lang="sa"};[^658]
>
> [Mithilā]{lang="sa"} for the Videhas;[^659]\
> [Campā]{lang="sa"} was laid out for the [Aṅgas]{lang="sa"};[^660]\
> and Varanasi for the [Kāsis]{lang="sa"}:[^661]\
> these were laid out by the Steward.

Then those six aristocrats were delighted with their respective gains,
having achieved all they wished for, "We have received exactly what we
wanted, what we wished for, what we desired, what we yearned for."

> [Sattabhū]{lang="sa"} and Brahmadatta,[^662]\
> [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"} and Bharata,[^663]\
> [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and the two [Dhataraṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}:\
> these were the seven [Bhāratas]{lang="sa"}.[^664]

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

#### 6.2. A Good Reputation  {#a-good-reputation .unnumbered}

Then the six aristocrats approached the Great Steward and said,
"Steward, just as you are King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}'s friend, dear,
beloved, and cherished, you are also our friend. Would you manage our
affairs? Please don't turn us down!"

"Yes, sirs," replied the Great Steward. Then the Great Steward managed
the realms of the seven kings. And he taught seven well-to-do brahmins,
and seven hundred bathed initiates to recite the hymns.

After some time he got this good reputation, "The Great Steward sees the
Divinity in person! The Great Steward discusses, converses, and consults
with the Divinity in person!"[^665]

The Great Steward thought, "I have the reputation of seeing the Divinity
in person, and discussing with him in person. But I don't. I have heard
that brahmins of the past who were elderly and senior, the tutors of
tutors, said: 'Whoever goes on retreat for the four months of the rainy
season and practices the absorption on compassion sees the Divinity and
discusses with him.'[^666] Why don't I do that?"

So the Great Steward went to King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and told him of the
situation, saying, "Sir, I wish to go on retreat for the four months of
the rainy season and practice the absorption on compassion. No one
should approach me, except for the one who brings my meal."

"Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats to put the same
proposal, and received the same reply.

He also went to the seven well-to-do brahmins and seven hundred bathed
initiates and put to them the same proposal, adding, "Sirs, recite the
hymns in detail as you have learned and memorized them, and teach each
other how to recite."

And they too said, "Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

Then the Great Steward went to his forty equal wives to put the same
proposal to them, and received the same reply.

Then the Great Steward had a new ceremonial hall built to the east of
his citadel, where he went on retreat for the four months of the rainy
season and practiced the absorption on compassion.[^667] And no one
approached him except the one who brought him meals.

But then, when the four months had passed, the Great Steward became
dissatisfied and anxious, "I have heard that brahmins of the past said
that whoever goes on retreat for the four months of the rainy season and
practices the absorption on compassion sees the Divinity and discusses
with him. But I neither see the Divinity nor discuss with him."

#### 6.3. A Discussion With the Divinity  {#a-discussion-with-the-divinity .unnumbered}

And then the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}, knowing the Great
Steward's train of thought, as easily as a strong person would extend or
contract their arm, vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared
in the Great Steward's presence. At that, the Great Steward became
frightened, scared, his hair standing on end, as he had never seen such
a sight before. So he addressed the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} in
verse:

> "Who might you be, sir,\
> so beautiful, glorious, majestic?\
> Not knowing, I ask---\
> how am I to know who you are?"
>
> "In the realm of divinity they know me\
> as 'The Eternal Youth'.\
> All the gods know me thus,\
> and so you should know me, Steward."
>
> "A Divinity deserves a seat and water,\
> foot-salve, and sweet cakes.\
> Sir, I ask you to please accept\
> these gifts of hospitality."
>
> "I accept the gifts of hospitality\
> of which you speak.\
> I grant you the opportunity\
> to ask whatever you desire---\
> about welfare and benefit in this life,\
> or happiness in lives to come."

Then the Great Steward thought, "the divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}
has granted me an opportunity. Should I ask him about what is beneficial
for this life or lives to come?"

Then he thought, "I'm skilled in what is beneficial for this life, and
others even ask me about it. Why don't I ask the Divinity about the
benefit that specifically applies to lives to come?" So he addressed the
divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} in verse:

> "I'm in doubt, so I ask the Divinity---\
> \>who is free of doubt---\
> about things one may learn from another.\
> Standing on what, training in what\
> may a mortal reach the deathless realm of divinity?"[^668]
>
> "He among men, O brahmin,\
> \>has given up possessiveness,[^669]\
> at one, compassionate,\
> free of putrefaction, and refraining from sex.\
> Standing on that, training in that\
> a mortal may reach the deathless realm of divinity."

"Sir, I understand what 'giving up possessiveness' means.[^670] It's
when someone gives up a large or small fortune, and a large or small
family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and
go forth from the lay life to homelessness. That's how I understand
'giving up possessiveness'.

Sir, I understand what 'at one' means.[^671] It's when someone frequents
a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine,
a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw. That's how I understand 'at one'.

Sir, I understand what 'compassionate' means. It's when someone
meditates spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. That's how I understand 'compassionate'.

But I don't understand what you say about putrefaction.[^672]

> What among men, O the Divinity, is putrefaction?\
> I don't understand, so tell me, attentive one:\
> wrapped in what do people stink,\
> headed for hell, shut out of the realm of divinity?"
>
> "Anger, lies, fraud, and deceit,\
> miserliness, vanity, jealousy,\
> desire, stinginess, harassing others,[^673]\
> greed, hate, vanity, and delusion---\
> those bound to such things\
> \>are not devoid of putrefaction;\
> they're headed for hell,\
> \>shut out of the realm of divinity."

"As I understand what you say about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell
while living at home.[^674] I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness!"

"Please do so, Steward, at your convenience."

#### 6.4. Informing King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}  {#informing-king-reṇu .unnumbered}

So the Great Steward went to King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} and said, "Sir,
please now find another high priest to manage the affairs of state for
you. I wish to go forth from the lay life to homelessness. As I
understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to
quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness.

> I announce to King [Reṇu]{lang="sa"},\
> the lord of the land:\
> you must learn how to rule,\
> for I no longer care for my ministry."
>
> "If you're lacking any pleasures,\
> I'll supply them for you.\
> I'll protect you from any harm,\
> for I command the nation's army.\
> You are my father, I am your son![^675]\
> O Steward, please don't leave!"
>
> "I'm lacking no pleasures,\
> and no-one is harming me.\
> I've heard a non-human voice,\
> so I no longer care for lay life."
>
> "What was that non-human like?\
> What did he say to you,\
> hearing which you would abandon\
> our house and all our people?"
>
> "Before entering this retreat,\
> I only liked to sacrifice.\
> I kindled the sacred flame,\
> strewn about with kusa grass.
>
> But then the Divinity the Eternal Youth\
> appeared to me from the realm of divinity.\
> He answered my question,\
> hearing which I no longer care for lay life."
>
> "I have faith, O Steward,\
> in that of which you speak.\
> Having heard a non-human voice,\
> what else could you do?
>
> We will follow your example,\
> Steward, be my Teacher!\
> Like a gem of beryl---\
> flawless, immaculate, beautiful---\
> that's how pure we shall live,\
> in the Steward's dispensation.

If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

#### 6.5. Informing the Six Aristocrats  {#informing-the-six-aristocrats .unnumbered}

Then the Great Steward went to the six aristocrats and said, "Good sirs,
please now find another high priest to manage the affairs of state for
you. I wish to go forth from the lay life to homelessness. As I
understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to
quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the lay life to
homelessness!"

Then the six aristocrats withdrew to one side and thought up a plan,
"These brahmins are greedy for wealth. Why don't we try to persuade him
with wealth?"

They returned to the Great Steward and said, "In these seven kingdoms
there is abundant wealth. We'll get you as much as you want."

"Enough, sirs. I already have abundant wealth, owing to my lords. Giving
up all that, I shall go forth."

Then the six aristocrats withdrew to one side and thought up a plan,
"These brahmins are greedy for women. Why don't we try to persuade him
with women?"

They returned to the Great Steward and said, "In these seven kingdoms
there are many women. We'll get you as many as you want."

"Enough, sirs. I already have forty equal wives. Giving up all them, I
shall go forth."

"If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

> "If you all give up sensual pleasures,\
> to which ordinary people are attached,\
> exert yourselves, being strong,\
> and possessing the power of patience.
>
> This path is the straight path,\
> this path is supreme.\
> Guarded by the good, the true teaching[^676]\
> leads to rebirth in the realm of divinity."[^677]

"Well then, sir, please wait for seven years. When seven years have
passed, we shall go forth with you. Your destiny shall be ours."

"Seven years is too long, sirs. I cannot wait that long. Who knows what
will happen to the living? We are heading to the next life. We must be
thoughtful and wake up! We must do what's good and lead the spiritual
life, for no-one born can escape death.[^678] I shall go forth."

"Well then, sir, please wait for six years, five years, four years,
three years, two years, one year, seven months, six months, five months,
four months, three months, two months, one month, or even a fortnight.
When a fortnight has passed, we shall go forth. Your destiny shall be
ours."

"A fortnight is too long, sirs. I cannot wait that long. Who knows what
will happen to the living? We are heading to the next life. We must be
thoughtful and wake up! We must do what's good and lead the spiritual
life, for no-one born can escape death. As I understand what the
Divinity says about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell while living at
home. I shall go forth from the lay life to homelessness."

"Well then, sir, please wait for a week, so that we can instruct our
sons and brothers in kingship. When a week has passed, we shall go
forth. Your destiny shall be ours."

"A week is not too long, sirs. I will wait that long."

#### 6.6. Informing the Brahmins  {#informing-the-brahmins .unnumbered}

Then the Great Steward also went to the seven well-to-do brahmins and
seven hundred bathed initiates and said, "Good sirs, please now find
another tutor to teach you to recite the hymns. I wish to go forth from
the lay life to homelessness. As I understand what the Divinity says
about putrefaction, it's not easy to quell while living at home. I shall
go forth from the lay life to homelessness."

"Please don't go forth from the lay life to homelessness! The life of
one gone forth is of little influence or profit, whereas the life of a
brahmin is of great influence and profit."

"Please, good sirs, don't say that. Who has greater influence and profit
than myself? For now I am like a king to kings, like the Divinity to
brahmins, like a deity to householders. Giving up all that, I shall go
forth. As I understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction, it's
not easy to quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the lay
life to homelessness."

"If the Steward is going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we
shall do so too. Your destiny shall be ours."

#### 6.7. Informing the Wives  {#informing-the-wives .unnumbered}

Then the Great Steward went to his forty equal wives and said, "Ladies,
please do whatever you wish, whether returning to your own families, or
finding another husband. I wish to go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. As I understand what the Divinity says about putrefaction,
it's not easy to quell while living at home. I shall go forth from the
lay life to homelessness."

"You are the only family we want! You are the only husband we want! If
you are going forth from the lay life to homelessness, we shall do so
too. Your destiny shall be ours."[^679]

#### 6.8. The Great Steward Goes Forth  {#the-great-steward-goes-forth .unnumbered}

When a week had passed, the Great Steward shaved off his hair and beard,
dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life to
homelessness. And when he had gone forth, the seven anointed aristocrat
kings, the seven brahmins with seven hundred initiates, the forty equal
wives, and many thousands of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and
many harem women shaved off their hair and beards, dressed in ocher
robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.[^680]

Escorted by that assembly, the Great Steward wandered on tour among the
villages, towns, and capital cities. And at that time, whenever he
arrived at a village or town, he was like a king to kings, like the
Divinity to brahmins, like a deity to householders. And whenever people
sneezed or tripped over they'd say: "Homage to the Great Steward! Homage
to the high priest for the seven!"

And the Great Steward meditated spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.[^681] He meditated spreading a heart full
of compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, he spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. And he taught his disciples the path to rebirth in
the company of Divinity.

Those of his disciples who completely understood the Great Steward's
instructions, at the breaking up of the body, after death, were reborn
in the realm of divinity. Of those disciples who only partly understood
the Great Steward's instructions, some were reborn in the company of the
gods who control what is imagined by others, while some were reborn in
the company of the gods who love to imagine, or the joyful gods, or the
gods of Yama, or the gods of the thirty-three, or the gods of the four
great kings. And at the very least they swelled the hosts of the
centaurs.

And so the going forth of all those gentlemen was not in vain, was not
wasted, but was fruitful and fertile.'

Do you remember this, Blessed One?"

"I remember, [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}. I myself was the brahmin Great
Steward at that time.[^682] And I taught those disciples the path to
rebirth in the company of Divinity. But that spiritual path of mine
doesn't lead to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. It only leads as far as rebirth in the
realm of divinity.[^683]

But this spiritual path does lead to disillusionment, dispassion,
cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. And what is
the spiritual path that leads to extinguishment? It is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion. This is the spiritual path that leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

Those of my disciples who completely understand my instructions realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
And they live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements.

Of those disciples who only partly understand my instructions, some,
with the ending of the five lower fetters, become reborn spontaneously.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world.

Some, with the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed,
hate, and delusion, become once-returners. They come back to this world
once only, then make an end of suffering.

And some, with the ending of three fetters, become stream-enterers, not
liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.

And so the going forth of all those gentlemen was not in vain, was not
wasted, but was fruitful and fertile."

That is what the Buddha said. Delighted, the centaur
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right,
before vanishing right there.

## N 20 The Great Congregation  *Mahāsamayasutta* {#n-20-the-great-congregation-mahāsamayasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, in the Great Wood near Kapilavatthu, together with
a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five hundred mendicants, all of whom were
perfected ones. And most of the deities from ten solar systems had
gathered to see the Buddha and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of
mendicants.[^684]

Then four deities of the Pure Abodes, aware of what was happening,
thought:[^685] "Why don't we go to the Buddha and each recite a verse in
his presence?"

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm,
they vanished from the Pure Abodes and reappeared in front of the
Buddha. They bowed to the Buddha and stood to one side. Standing to one
side, one deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "There's a great congregation in the woods,[^686]\
> where heavenly hosts have assembled.\
> We've come to this righteous congregation\
> to see the invincible [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}!"

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "The mendicants there are immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"},\
> they've straightened their own minds.\
> Like a charioteer holding the reins,\
> the astute ones protect their senses."

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "They snapped the post and snapped the cross-bar,\
> unstirred, they tore out the boundary post.[^687]\
> They live pure and immaculate,\
> the young giants tamed by the Clear-eyed One."[^688]

Then another deity recited this verse in the Buddha's presence:

> "Anyone who has gone to the Buddha for refuge\
> won't go to a plane of loss.\
> After giving up this human body,\
> they swell the hosts of gods."[^689]

### 1. The Gathering of Deities  {#the-gathering-of-deities .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, most of the deities from ten solar systems have gathered to
see the Realized One and the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. The Buddhas
of the past had, and the Buddhas of the future will have, gatherings of
deities that are at most like the gathering for me now.[^690] I shall
declare the names of the heavenly hosts; I shall extol the names of the
heavenly hosts; I shall teach the names of the heavenly hosts. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied.

The Buddha said this:

> "I invoke a paean of praise![^691]\
> Where the earth-gods dwell,\
> there, in mountain caves,\
> resolute and composed,
>
> dwell many like lonely lions,\
> who have mastered their fears.[^692]\
> Their minds are bright and pure,\
> clear and undisturbed."
>
> The teacher knew that over five hundred\
> were in the wood at Kapilavatthu.\
> Therefore he addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "The heavenly hosts have come forth;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them."\
> Those monks grew keen,\
> hearing the Buddha's instruction.
>
> Knowledge manifested in them,\
> seeing those non-human beings.\
> Some saw a hundred,\
> a thousand, even seventy thousand,
>
> while some saw a hundred thousand\
> non-human beings.\
> But some saw an endless number\
> spread out in every direction.
>
> And all that was known\
> and distinguished by the Clear-eyed One.\
> Therefore he addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "The heavenly hosts have come forth;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them.\
> I shall extol them for you,\
> with lyrics in proper order.
>
> There are seven thousand spirits,[^693]\
> earth-gods of Kapilavatthu.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From the Himalayas there are six thousand\
> spirits of different colors.[^694]\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From Mount [Sātā]{lang="sa"} there are three thousand[^695]\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> And thus there are sixteen thousand\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> From [Vessāmitta]{lang="sa"}'s mountain there are five hundred[^696]\
> spirits of different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> And there's [Kumbhīra]{lang="sa"} of [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"},[^697]\
> whose home is on Mount Vepulla.\
> Attended by more than\
> a hundred thousand spirits,\
> [Kumbhīra]{lang="sa"} of [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> King [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"} rules[^698]\
> the eastern quarter.\
> Lord of the centaurs,[^699]\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.[^700]\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King [Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"} rules[^701]\
> the southern quarter.\
> Lord of the goblins,[^702]\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King [Virūpakkha]{lang="sa"} rules[^703]\
> the western quarter.\
> Lord of the dragons,\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> King Kuvera rules[^704]\
> the northern quarter.\
> Lord of spirits,\
> he's a great king, glorious.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of them named Indra.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"} in the east,\
> [Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"} to the south,\
> [Virūpakkha]{lang="sa"} to the west,\
> and Kuvera in the north.
>
> These four great kings,[^705]\
> all around in the four quarters,\
> stood there dazzling\
> in the wood at Kapilavatthu.
>
> Their deceitful heathens came,[^706]\
> so treacherous and crafty---\
> the deceivers [Kuṭeṇḍu]{lang="sa"}, [Viṭeṇḍu]{lang="sa"},[^707]\
> with [Viṭucca]{lang="sa"} and [Viṭuṭa]{lang="sa"}.[^708]
>
> And Candana and [Kāmaseṭṭha]{lang="sa"},[^709]\
> [Kinnughaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} and [Nighaṇḍu]{lang="sa"},\
> [Panāda]{lang="sa"} and [Opamañña]{lang="sa"},[^710]\
> and [Mātali]{lang="sa"}, the god's charioteer.[^711]
>
> Cittasena the centaur came too,[^712]\
> and the kings Nala and Janesabha.[^713]\
> [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} came too, with[^714]\
> Timbaru and [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}.
>
> These and other kings there were,\
> the centaurs with their kings.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> Then came the dragons of [Nābhasa]{lang="sa"} lake,[^715]\
> and those from [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} with those from
> [Takkasilā]{lang="sa"}.[^716]\
> The Kambalas and Assataras came[^717]\
> and those from [Payāga]{lang="sa"} with their kin.[^718]
>
> Those from [Yamunā]{lang="sa"}, and the
> [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"}[^719]\
> dragons came, so glorious.\
> And [Erāvaṇa]{lang="sa"} the great dragon\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> Those who seize the dragon kings by force---[^720]\
> Heavenly, twice-born birds with piercing vision---[^721]\
> swoop down to the wood from the sky;\
> their name is 'Rainbow Phoenix'.[^722]
>
> But the dragon kings remained fearless,\
> for the Buddha kept them safe from the phoenixes.\
> Introducing each other with gentle words,\
> the dragons and phoenixes\
> \>took the Buddha as refuge.[^723]
>
> Defeated by Vajirahattha,[^724]\
> the titans live in the ocean.\
> They're brothers of [Vāsava]{lang="sa"},[^725]\
> powerful and glorious.
>
> There's the terrifying [Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"},[^726]\
> the [Dānava]{lang="sa"} and Ghasa titans,[^727]\
> Vepacitti and Sucitti,[^728]\
> [Pahārāda]{lang="sa"} with Namuci,[^729]
>
> and Bali's hundred sons,[^730]\
> all named after Virocana.[^731]\
> Bali's army armed themselves\
> and went to the auspicious [Rāhu]{lang="sa"}, saying:[^732]\
> 'Now is the time, sir,\
> for the meeting of mendicants in the wood.'
>
> The gods of water and earth,\
> and fire and wind came there.[^733]\
> The gods of [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} and [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"}'s
> offsping,[^734]\
> and Soma together with Yasa.[^735]
>
> A host of the gods of love[^736]\
> and compassion came, so glorious.\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The Vishnu and [Sahalī]{lang="sa"} gods,[^737]\
> and the unequaled pair of twins.[^738]\
> The gods living on the moon came,\
> with the Moon before them.
>
> The gods living on the sun came,\
> with the Sun before them.\
> And with the stars before them\
> came the languid gods of clouds.
>
> And [Vāsava]{lang="sa"} came, the greatest of the Vasus,[^739]\
> who is Sakka the Able, Purindada the Firstgiver:[^740]\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> Then came the [Sahabhū]{lang="sa"} gods,[^741]\
> blazing like a crested flame;\
> and the [Ariṭṭhakas]{lang="sa"} and Rojas too,[^742]\
> and the gods hued blue as flax.
>
> The [Varuṇas]{lang="sa"} and Sahadhammas,[^743]\
> the Accutas and Anejakas,[^744]\
> the [Sūleyyas]{lang="sa"} and Ruciras all came,[^745]\
> as did the [Vāsavanesi]{lang="sa"} gods.[^746]\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The [Samānas]{lang="sa"}, [Mahāsamānas]{lang="sa"},[^747]\
> [Mānusas]{lang="sa"}, and [Mānusuttamas]{lang="sa"} all came,[^748]\
> and the gods depraved by play,[^749]\
> and those who are malevolent.[^750]
>
> Then came the gods of Mercury,[^751]\
> and those who live on Mars.[^752]\
> The [Pāragas]{lang="sa"} and [Mahāpāragas]{lang="sa"} came,[^753]\
> such glorious gods.\
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.
>
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The gods of Venus, the newborn Sun,\
> \>and the Dawn[^754]\
> came along with those from Saturn.[^755]\
> And the gods of the white globe came[^756]\
> leading the brilliant gods.[^757]
>
> The [Sadāmattas]{lang="sa"} and [Hāragajas]{lang="sa"},[^758]\
> and assorted glorious ones;[^759]\
> Pajjuna came thundering,[^760]\
> he who rains on all quarters.
>
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> The Khemiyas from the realms of Tusita and Yama,[^761]\
> and the glorious [Kaṭṭhakas]{lang="sa"} came;[^762]\
> the [Lambītakas]{lang="sa"}, [Lāmaseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"},[^763]\
> those called the Shining,\
> \>and the gods of Granted Wishes.[^764]\
> The gods who love to imagine came too,\
> and those who control what is imagined by others.
>
> These ten hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They're powerful and brilliant,\
> so beautiful and glorious.\
> Rejoicing, they've come forth\
> to the meeting of mendicants in the wood.
>
> These sixty hosts of gods\
> shone in all different colors.\
> They came organized by name,\
> these and others likewise, thinking:
>
> 'They who have shed rebirth, the kindly ones,[^765]\
> the undefiled ones who have crossed the flood---\
> let us see them,\
> \>with the dragon who brought them across,\
> who like the Moon has overcome darkness.'
>
> [Subrahmā]{lang="sa"} and Paramatta came,[^766]\
> with sons of those powerful ones.\
> [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} and Tissa[^767]\
> also came to the meeting in the wood.
>
> Of a thousand realms of divinity,\
> the Great Divinity stands forth.[^768]\
> He has arisen, resplendent,\
> his formidable body so glorious.
>
> Ten Gods Almighty came there,[^769]\
> each one of them wielding power,\
> and in the middle of them came\
> [Hārita]{lang="sa"} with his following."[^770]
>
> When they had all come forth---\
> the gods with their Lord, and the divinities---\
> [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s army came forth too:\
> see the stupidity of the Dark Lord!
>
> "Come, seize them and bind them," he said,\
> "let them be bound by desire!\
> Surround them on all sides,\
> don't let any escape!"
>
> And so there the great general,\
> the Dark Lord sent forth his army.\
> He struck the ground with his fist\
> to make a horrifying sound
>
> like a storm cloud shedding rain,\
> thundering and flashing.\
> But then he retreated,\
> furious, out of control.
>
> And all that was known\
> and distinguished by the Clear-eyed One.\
> Thereupon the Teacher addressed\
> the disciples who love the teaching:
>
> "[Māra]{lang="sa"}'s army has arrived;\
> mendicants, you should be aware of them."\
> Those monks grew keen,\
> hearing the Buddha's instruction.\
> The army fled from those free of passion,\
> and not a single hair was stirred!
>
> "All triumphant in battle,\
> so fearless and glorious.\
> They rejoice with all the spirits,\
> the disciples well-known among men."

## N 21 Sakka's Questions  *Sakkapañhasutta* {#n-21-sakkas-questions-sakkapañhasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^771]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Magadhans, where east of [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} there
is a brahmin village named [Ambasaṇḍā]{lang="sa"}, north of which, on
Mount Vediyaka, is Indra's hill cave.[^772]

Now at that time Sakka, the lord of gods, grew eager to see the Buddha.
He thought, "Where is the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha?"

Seeing that the Buddha was at Indra's hill cave, he addressed the gods
of the thirty-three, "Good sirs, the Buddha is staying in the land of
the Magadhans at Indra's hill cave. What if we were to go and see that
Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?"

"Yes, lord," replied the gods.

Then Sakka addressed the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"},[^773] "Dear
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, the Buddha is staying in the land of the
Magadhans at Indra's hill cave. What if we were to go and see that
Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha?"

"Yes, lord," replied the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}. Taking his
arched harp made from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went as Sakka's
attendant.[^774]

Then Sakka went at the head of a retinue consisting of the gods of the
thirty-three and the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}.[^775] As easily as
a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the
heaven of the gods of the thirty-three and landed on Mount Vediyaka
north of [Ambasaṇḍā]{lang="sa"}.

Now at that time a dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and
[Ambasaṇḍā]{lang="sa"}, as happens through the glory of the gods. People
in the villages round about, terrified, shocked, and awestruck, said,
"Mount Vediyaka must be on fire today, blazing and burning! Oh why has
such a dazzling light appeared over Mount Vediyaka and
[Ambasaṇḍā]{lang="sa"}?"

Then Sakka addressed the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, "My dear
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, it is hard for one like me to get near the
Realized Ones while they are on retreat practicing absorption, enjoying
absorption.[^776] But if you were to charm the Buddha first, then I
could go to see him."

"Yes, lord," replied the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}. Taking his
arched harp made from the pale timber of wood-apple, he went to Indra's
hill cave. When he had drawn near, he stood to one side, thinking, "This
is neither too far nor too near; and he'll hear my voice."

### 1. [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}'s Song  {#pañcasikhas-song .unnumbered}

Standing to one side, [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} played his arched harp,
and sang these verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the perfected ones, and sensual love.[^777]

> "O [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"} [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}, my Darling
> Sunshine,[^778]\
> I pay homage to your father Timbaru,[^779]\
> through whom was born a lady so fine,\
> to fill me with a joy I never knew.
>
> As sweet as a breeze to one who's sweating,\
> or when thirsty, a sweet and cooling drink,\
> so dear are you, [Aṅgīrasi]{lang="sa"}, to me---[^780]\
> just like the teaching is to all the saints![^781]
>
> Like a cure when you're struck by fever dire,\
> or food to ease the hunger pain,\
> come on, [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"}, please put out my fire,[^782]\
> quench me like water on a flame.
>
> As elephants burning in the heat of summer,\
> sink down in a lotus pond to rest,\
> so cool, full of petals and of pollen---\
> that's how I would plunge into your breast.
>
> Like elephants bursting bonds in rutting season,[^783]\
> beating off the pricks of lance and pikes---\
> I just don't understand what is the reason\
> I'm so crazy for your shapely thighs!
>
> For you, my heart is full of passion,\
> I'm in a besotted state of mind.\
> There is no going back, I'm just not able,\
> I'm like a fish that's hooked up on the line.
>
> Come on, my [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"}, hold me, fair of thighs!\
> Embrace me, maid of captivating eyes!\
> Take me in your arms, my lovely lady,\
> that's all I'd ever want or could desire.
>
> Ah, then my desire was such a small thing,\
> my sweet, with your curling wavy hair;\
> now, like to arahants an offering,\
> it's grown so very much from there.
>
> Whatever the merit I have forged\
> by giving to such perfected beings---\
> may that, my altogether gorgeous,\
> ripen in togetherness with you.[^784]
>
> Whatever the merit I have forged\
> in this vast territory,\
> may that, my altogether gorgeous,\
> ripen in togetherness with you.
>
> As the Sakyan, absorbed, did meditate\
> at one, alert, and mindful too,\
> the sage seeking the state free of death---[^785]\
> so I, oh my Sunshine, seek for you!
>
> And just like the sage would delight,\
> once he had awakened to the truth,\
> so I would delight, my fine lady,\
> were I to become one with you.
>
> If Sakka were to grant me one wish,[^786]\
> as Lord of the Thirty and Three,\
> my [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"}, you're all I would wish for,\
> so strong is the love in me.
>
> Like a freshly blossoming sal tree\
> is your father, my lady so wise.\
> I pay homage to he, bowing humbly,\
> whose daughter is of such a kind."

When [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} had spoken, the Buddha said to him,
"[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, the sound of your strings blends well with the
sound of your singing,[^787] so that neither overpowers the other. But
when did you compose these verses on the Buddha, the teaching, the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the perfected ones, and sensual love?"[^788]

"This one time, sir, when you were first awakened, you were staying in
[Uruvelā]{lang="sa"} at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the
[Nerañjarā]{lang="sa"} River. And at that time I was in love with the
lady named [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"} [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}, 'Darling
Sunshine', the daughter of the centaur king Timbaru. But the sister
desired another.[^789] It was the one named [Sikhaṇḍī]{lang="sa"}, the
son of [Mātali]{lang="sa"} the charioteer, who she loved.[^790] Since I
couldn't win that sister by any means, I took my arched harp to
Timbaru's home, where I played those verses.

When I finished, [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"} said to me, 'Dear sir, I
have not personally seen the Buddha. But I did hear about him when I
went to dance for the gods of the thirty-three in the Hall of Justice.
Since you extol the Buddha, let us meet up today.' And that's when I met
up with that sister. But we have not met since."

### 2. The Approach of Sakka  {#the-approach-of-sakka .unnumbered}

Then Sakka, lord of gods, thought, "[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} is
exchanging pleasantries with the Buddha."

So he addressed [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, "My dear
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, please bow to the Buddha for me, saying: 'Sir,
Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his head
at your feet.'"

"Yes, lord," replied [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}. He bowed to the Buddha and
said, "Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows
with his head at your feet."

"So may Sakka with his ministers and retinue be happy,
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}," said the Buddha, "for all want to be
happy---whether gods, humans, titans, dragons, centaurs, or any of the
other diverse creatures there may be."

For that is how the Realized Ones salute such illustrious spirits. And
being saluted by the Buddha, Sakka entered Indra's hill cave, bowed to
the Buddha, and stood to one side. And the gods of the thirty-three did
likewise, as did [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}.

And at that time the uneven places were evened out, the cramped places
were opened up, the darkness vanished in the cave and light appeared, as
happens through the glory of the gods.

Then the Buddha said to Sakka, "It's incredible and amazing that you,
the venerable Kosiya, who has so many duties and so much to do, should
come here."[^791]

"For a long time I've wanted to come and see the Buddha, but I wasn't
able, being prevented by my many duties and responsibilities for the
gods of the thirty-three. This one time, sir, the Buddha was staying
near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the frankincense-tree hut. Then I went to
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} to see the Buddha. But at that time the Buddha was
sitting immersed in some kind of meditation. And a divine maiden of
Great King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} named [Bhūjati]{lang="sa"} was
attending on the Buddha, standing there paying homage to him with joined
palms.[^792]

So I said to her, 'Sister, please bow to the Buddha for me, saying:
"Sir, Sakka, lord of gods, with his ministers and retinue, bows with his
head at your feet."'

When I said this, she said to me, 'It's the wrong time to see the
Buddha, as he's in retreat.'

'Well then, sister, please convey my message when the Buddha emerges
from that immersion.' I hope that sister bowed to you? Do you remember
what she said?"

"She did bow, lord of gods, and I remember what she said. I also
remember that it was the sound of your chariot wheels that pulled me out
of that immersion."[^793]

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the gods who were
reborn in the host of the thirty-three before me: 'When a Realized One
arises in the world, perfected and fully awakened, the heavenly hosts
swell, while the titan hosts dwindle.' And I have seen this with my own
eyes.

#### 2.1. The Story of [Gopikā]{lang="sa"}  {#the-story-of-gopikā .unnumbered}

Right here in Kapilavatthu there was a Sakyan lady named
[Gopikā]{lang="sa"} who had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and
the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and had fulfilled her ethics.[^794] Losing her
attachment to femininity, she developed masculinity. When her body broke
up, after death, she was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.[^795]
In the company of the gods of the thirty-three she became one of my
sons. There they knew him as the god Gopaka.

Meanwhile three others, mendicants who had led the spiritual life under
the Buddha, were reborn in the inferior centaur realm.[^796] There they
amused themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation, and became my servants and attendants.

At that, Gopaka scolded them, 'Where on earth were you at, good sirs,
when you heard the Buddha's teaching![^797] For while I was still a
woman I had confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and had fulfilled my ethics. I lost my attachment
to femininity and developed masculinity. When my body broke up, after
death, I was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. In the company of
the gods of the thirty-three I became one of Sakka's sons. Here they
know me as the god Gopaka. But you, having led the spiritual life under
the Buddha, were reborn in the inferior centaur realm. It is a sad sight
indeed to see fellow practitioners reborn in the inferior centaur
realm.'

When scolded by Gopaka, two of those gods regained their memory right
away. They went to the host of the priests of Divinity, but one god
remained attached to sensual pleasures.[^798]

> '"I was a laywoman disciple of the Clear-eyed One,\
> and my name was [Gopikā]{lang="sa"}.\
> I was devoted to the Buddha and the teaching,\
> and I faithfully served the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}.
>
> Because of the excellence of the Buddha's teaching,\
> I'm now a mighty, splendid son of Sakka,\
> reborn among the Three and Thirty.\
> And here they know me as Gopaka.
>
> Then I saw some mendicants who I'd seen before,\
> dwelling in the host of centaurs.\
> When I used to be a human,\
> they were disciples of Gotama.
>
> I served them with food and drink,\
> and clasped their feet in my own home.[^799]\
> Where on earth were these good sirs at\
> when they learned the Buddha's teachings?
>
> For each must know for themselves the teaching\
> so well-taught, realized by the Clear-eyed One.\
> I was one who followed you,[^800]\
> having heard the fine words of the noble ones.
>
> I'm now a mighty, splendid son of Sakka,\
> reborn among the Three and Thirty.[^801]\
> But you followed the best of men,\
> and led the supreme spiritual life,
>
> but still you're born in this lesser realm,\
> a rebirth unbefitting.\
> It's a sad sight I see, good sirs,\
> fellow practitioners in a lesser realm.
>
> Reborn in the host of centaurs,\
> only to wait upon the gods.\
> Meanwhile, I dwelt in a house---[^802]\
> but see my distinction now!
>
> Having been a woman now I'm a male god,\
> blessed with heavenly sensual pleasures."\
> Scolded by that disciple of Gotama,[^803]\
> comprehending Gopaka,\
> \>they were struck with urgency.
>
> "Let's strive, let's try hard---\
> we won't serve others any more!"\
> Two of them roused up energy,\
> recalling the Buddha's instructions.
>
> Right away they became dispassionate,\
> seeing the drawbacks in sensual pleasures.\
> The fetters and bonds of sensual pleasures---\
> the ties of the Wicked One so hard to break---
>
> they burst them like a bull elephant his ropes,\
> and passed right over the thirty-three.\
> The gods with Indra and the Progenitor\
> were all gathered in the Hall of Justice.
>
> As they sat there, they passed over them,\
> the heroes desireless, practicing purity.\
> Seeing them, [Vāsava]{lang="sa"} was struck with urgency;[^804]\
> the master of gods in the midst of the group said,
>
> "These were born in the lesser centaur realm,\
> but now they pass us by!"\
> Heeding the speech of one so moved,\
> Gopaka addressed [Vāsava]{lang="sa"},
>
> "There is a Buddha, a lord of men, in the world.[^805]\
> Known as the Sakyan Sage,\
> \>he's mastered the senses.[^806]\
> Those sons of his lost their memory;[^807]\
> but when scolded by me they gained it back.
>
> Of the three, there is one who remains\
> dwelling in the host of centaurs.\
> But two, recollecting the path to awakening,\
> serene, spurn even the gods.
>
> Such is the explanation of the teaching here:[^808]\
> not a single disciple doubts that.[^809]\
> We venerate the Buddha, the victor, lord of men,\
> who has crossed the flood and cut off doubt.
>
> They attained distinction to the extent\
> they understood the teaching here;\
> two of them distinguished\
> in the host of the priests of Divinity."'[^810]
>
> We have come here, dear sir,\
> to realize this same teaching.\
> If the Buddha would give me a chance,\
> I would ask a question, dear sir."

Then the Buddha thought, "For a long time now this spirit has led a pure
life. Any question he asks me will be beneficial, not unbeneficial. And
he will quickly understand any answer I give to his question."

So the Buddha addressed Sakka in verse:

> "Ask me your question, [Vāsava]{lang="sa"},\
> whatever you want.\
> I'll solve each and every\
> question you have."

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

Having been granted an opportunity by the Buddha, Sakka asked the first
question.

"Dear sir, what fetters bind the gods, humans, titans, dragons,
centaurs---and any of the other diverse creatures---so that, though they
wish to be free of enmity, violence, hostility, and hate, they still
have enmity, violence, hostility, and hate?"[^811]

Such was Sakka's question to the Buddha. And the Buddha answered him:

"Lord of gods, the fetters of jealousy and stinginess bind the gods,
humans, titans, dragons, centaurs---and any of the other diverse
creatures---[^812] so that, though they wish to be free of enmity,
violence, hostility, and hate, they still have enmity, violence,
hostility, and hate."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

And then, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said, Sakka
asked another question:

"But dear sir, what is the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of
jealousy and stinginess?[^813] When what exists is there jealousy and
stinginess? When what doesn't exist is there no jealousy and
stinginess?"

"The liked and the disliked, lord of gods, are the source of jealousy
and stinginess. When the liked and the disliked exist there is jealousy
and stinginess. When the liked and the disliked don't exist there is no
jealousy and stinginess."

"But dear sir, what is the source of what is liked and disliked?"

"Desire is the source of what is liked and disliked."[^814]

"But what is the source of desire?"

"Thought is the source of desire."[^815]

"But what is the source of thought?"

"Judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions are the source of
thoughts."[^816]

"But how does a mendicant fittingly practice for the cessation of
judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions?"

#### 2.2. Meditation on Feelings  {#meditation-on-feelings .unnumbered}

"Lord of gods, there are two kinds of happiness, I say: that which you
should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. There are two
kinds of sadness, I say: that which you should cultivate, and that which
you should not cultivate. There are two kinds of equanimity, I say: that
which you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of happiness? Well, should you
know of a happiness:[^817] 'When I cultivate this kind of happiness,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not cultivate that kind of happiness. Whereas, should you know of a
happiness: 'When I cultivate this kind of happiness, unskillful
qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate
that kind of happiness. And that which is free of placing the mind and
keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing
the mind and keeping it connected.[^818] That's why I said there are two
kinds of happiness.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of sadness? Well, should you know
of a sadness: 'When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not
cultivate that kind of sadness. Whereas, should you know of a sadness:
'When I cultivate this kind of sadness, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate that kind of
sadness.[^819] And that which is free of placing the mind and keeping it
connected is better than that which still involves placing the mind and
keeping it connected.[^820] That's why I said there are two kinds of
sadness.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of equanimity? Well, should you
know of an equanimity: 'When I cultivate this kind of equanimity,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not cultivate that kind of equanimity. Whereas, should you know of an
equanimity: 'When I cultivate this kind of equanimity, unskillful
qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should cultivate
that kind of equanimity. And that which is free of placing the mind and
keeping it connected is better than that which still involves placing
the mind and keeping it connected. That's why I said there are two kinds
of equanimity.

That's how a mendicant fittingly practices for the cessation of
judgments driven by the proliferation of perceptions."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

#### 2.3. Restraint in the Monastic Code  {#restraint-in-the-monastic-code .unnumbered}

And then Sakka asked another question:

"But dear sir, how does a mendicant practice for restraint in the
monastic code?"

"Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior:[^821]
that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior: that which
you should cultivate, and that which you should not cultivate. There are
two kinds of search, I say: that which you should cultivate, and that
which you should not cultivate.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of bodily behavior? Well, should
you know of a bodily conduct: 'When I cultivate this kind of bodily
conduct, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You
should not cultivate that kind of bodily conduct. Whereas, should you
know of a bodily conduct: 'When I cultivate this kind of bodily conduct,
unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You should
cultivate that kind of bodily conduct. That's why I said there are two
kinds of bodily behavior.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of verbal behavior? Well, should
you know of a kind of verbal behavior that it causes unskillful
qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline, you should not
cultivate it. Whereas, should you know of a kind of verbal behavior that
it causes unskillful qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow,
you should cultivate it. That's why I said there are two kinds of verbal
behavior.

Why did I say that there are two kinds of search? Well, should you know
of a kind of search that it causes unskillful qualities to grow while
skillful qualities decline, you should not cultivate it.[^822] Whereas,
should you know of a kind of search that it causes unskillful qualities
to decline while skillful qualities grow, you should cultivate it.
That's why I said there are two kinds of search.

That's how a mendicant practices for restraint in the monastic code."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."

#### 2.4. Sense Restraint  {#sense-restraint .unnumbered}

And then Sakka asked another question:

"But dear sir, how does a mendicant practice for restraint of the sense
faculties?"

"Lord of gods, I say that there are two kinds of sight known by the eye:
that which you should cultivate, and that which you should not
cultivate. There are two kinds of sound known by the ear ... smells
known by the nose ... tastes known by the tongue ... touches known by
the body ... ideas known by the mind: that which you should cultivate,
and that which you should not cultivate."

When the Buddha said this, Sakka said to him:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement:[^823] You should not cultivate the kind of sight known
by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to grow while skillful
qualities decline.[^824] And you should cultivate the kind of sight
known by the eye which causes unskillful qualities to decline while
skillful qualities grow. You should not cultivate the kind of sound,
smell, taste, touch, or idea known by the mind which causes unskillful
qualities to grow while skillful qualities decline. And you should
cultivate the kind of idea known by the mind which causes unskillful
qualities to decline while skillful qualities grow.

Sir, that's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement. Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond doubt and got
rid of indecision."

And then Sakka asked another question:

"Dear sir, do all ascetics and brahmins have a single doctrine, ethics,
desire, and attachment?"[^825]

"No, lord of gods, they do not."

"Why not?"

"The world has many and diverse elements. Whatever element sentient
beings insist on in this world of many and diverse elements, they
obstinately stick to it, insisting that:[^826] 'This is the only truth,
anything else is futile.' That's why not all ascetics and brahmins have
a single doctrine, ethics, desire, and attachment."

"Dear sir, have all ascetics and brahmins reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal?"

"No, lord of gods, they have not."

"Why not?"

"Those mendicants who are freed through the ending of craving have
reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the
ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal. That's why not all ascetics
and brahmins have reached the ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from
the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the ultimate goal."

Such was the Buddha's answer to Sakka. Delighted, Sakka approved and
agreed with what the Buddha said, saying, "That's so true, Blessed One!
That's so true, Holy One! Hearing the Buddha's answer, I've gone beyond
doubt and got rid of indecision."[^827]

And then Sakka, having approved and agreed with what the Buddha said,
said to him,

"Turbulence, sir, is a disease, a boil, a dart. Turbulence drags a
person to be reborn in life after life.[^828] That's why a person finds
themselves in states high and low. Elsewhere, among other ascetics and
brahmins, I wasn't even given a chance to ask these questions that the
Buddha has answered. The dart of doubt and indecision has lain within me
for a long time, but the Buddha has plucked it out."

"Lord of gods, do you recall having asked this question of other
ascetics and brahmins?"[^829]

"I do, sir."

"If you wouldn't mind, lord of gods, tell me how they answered."

"It's no trouble when someone such as the Blessed One is sitting here."

"Well, speak then, lord of gods."

"Sir, I approached those who I imagined were ascetics and brahmins
living in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. But they were stumped by
my question, and they even questioned me in return: 'What is the
venerable's name?' So I answered them: 'Dear sir, I am Sakka, lord of
gods.' So they asked me another question: 'But lord of gods, what deed
brought you to this position?' So I taught them the Dhamma as I had
learned and memorized it. And they were pleased with just that much: 'We
have seen Sakka, lord of gods! And he answered our questions!'
Invariably, they become my disciples, I don't become theirs. But sir, I
am the Buddha's disciple, a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening."

#### 2.5. On Feeling Happy  {#on-feeling-happy .unnumbered}

"Lord of gods, do you recall ever feeling such joy and happiness
before?"

"I do, sir."

"But how?"

"Once upon a time, sir, a battle was fought between the gods and the
titans. In that battle the gods won and the titans lost. It occurred to
me as victor, 'Now the gods shall enjoy both the nectar of the gods and
the nectar of the titans.'[^830] But sir, that joy and happiness is in
the sphere of the rod and the sword. It doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
But the joy and happiness I feel listening to the Buddha's teaching is
not in the sphere of the rod and the sword. It does lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment."[^831]

"But lord of gods, what reason do you see for speaking of such joy and
happiness?"

"I see six reasons to speak of such joy and happiness, sir.

> While staying right here,\
> remaining in the godly form,\
> I have gained an extended life:[^832]\
> know this, dear sir.

This is the first reason.

> When I fall from the heavenly host,\
> leaving behind the non-human life,\
> I shall consciously go to a new womb,[^833]\
> wherever my mind delights.

This is the second reason.

> Living happily under the guidance\
> of the one of unclouded wisdom,\
> I shall practice systematically,[^834]\
> aware and mindful.

This is the third reason.

> And if awakening should arise\
> as I practice systematically,\
> I shall live as one who understands,\
> and my end shall come right there.[^835]

This is the fourth reason.

> When I fall from the human realm,\
> leaving behind the human life,\
> I shall become a god again,\
> supreme in the heaven realm.[^836]

This is the fifth reason.

> They are the finest of gods,\
> the glorious [Akaniṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}.\
> So long as my final life goes on,[^837]\
> there my home will be.

This is the sixth reason.

Seeing these six reasons I speak of such joy and happiness.

> My wishes unfulfilled,\
> doubting and indecisive,\
> I wandered for such a long time,\
> in search of the Realized One.
>
> I imagined that ascetics\
> living in seclusion\
> must surely be awakened,\
> so I went to sit near them.
>
> 'How is there success?\
> How is there failure?'\
> But they were stumped by such questions\
> about the path and practice.
>
> And when they found out that I\
> was Sakka, come from the gods,\
> they questioned me instead about\
> the deed that brought me to this state.
>
> I taught them the Dhamma\
> as I had learned it among men.\
> They were delighted with that, saying:\
> 'We've seen [Vāsava]{lang="sa"}!'
>
> Now since I've seen the Buddha,\
> who helps us overcome doubt,\
> today, free of fear,\
> I pay homage to the awakened one.
>
> Destroyer of the dart of craving,\
> the Buddha is unrivaled.\
> I bow to the great hero,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun.
>
> In the same way that Divinity ought be revered[^838]\
> by we gods, dear sir,[^839]\
> today we shall revere you---\
> come, let us revere you ourselves![^840]
>
> You alone are the Awakened!\
> You are the Teacher supreme!\
> In the world with its gods,\
> you have no rival."

Then Sakka addressed the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, "Dear
[Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, you were very helpful to me, since you first
charmed the Buddha, after which I went to see him. I shall appoint you
to your father's position---you shall be king of the centaurs. And I
give you [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"} [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}, for she loves
you very much."[^841]

Then Sakka, touching the ground with his hand, expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three times:[^842]

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!"

And while this discourse was being spoken, the stainless, immaculate
vision of the Dhamma arose in Sakka, lord of gods: "Everything that has
a beginning has an end." And also for another 80,000 deities.[^843]

Such were the questions Sakka was invited to ask, and which were
answered by the Buddha. And that's why the name of this discussion is
"Sakka's Questions".

## N 22 The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation  *Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta* {#n-22-the-longer-discourse-on-mindfulness-meditation-mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^844]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named
[Kammāsadamma]{lang="sa"}. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to
convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past
sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the
system, and to realize extinguishment.[^845]

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world.[^846] They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^847] They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^848] They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^849]

### 1. Observing the Body  {#observing-the-body .unnumbered}

#### 1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing  {#mindfulness-of-breathing .unnumbered}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.[^850] Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.[^851]

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.'[^852]

When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.'
Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.'[^853]

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole
body.'[^854]

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical
process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the
physical process.'[^855]

It's like a deft carpenter or carpenter's apprentice. When making a deep
cut they know: 'I'm making a deep cut,' and when making a shallow cut
they know: 'I'm making a shallow cut.'[^856]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally.[^857] They meditate
observing the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish.[^858] Or mindfulness is established
that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and
mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the
world.[^859]

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

#### 1.2. The Postures  {#the-postures .unnumbered}

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: 'I am walking.' When
standing they know: 'I am standing.' When sitting they know: 'I am
sitting.' And when lying down they know: 'I am lying down.'[^860]
Whatever posture their body is in, they know it.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.3. Situational Awareness  {#situational-awareness .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out
and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and
extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl, and robes; when
eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating;
when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[^861]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive  {#focusing-on-the-repulsive .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of filth.[^862] 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.'[^863]

It's as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with
various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas,
sesame, and ordinary rice. And someone with clear eyes were to open it
and examine the contents: 'These grains are fine rice, these are wheat,
these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are
ordinary rice.'[^864]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.5. Focusing on the Elements  {#focusing-on-the-elements .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement
or posture, according to the elements:[^865] 'In this body there is the
earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air
element.'[^866]

It's as if a deft butcher or butcher's apprentice were to kill a cow and
sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into chops.[^867]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

#### 1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations  {#the-charnel-ground-contemplations .unnumbered}

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and festering.[^868] They'd compare it with their own
body:[^869] 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and
cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an aspect of the
body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers,
leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. They'd compare it
with their own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same
kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an
aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ...

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

Bones rid of sinews, scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a
thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here
an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the
skull. ...

White bones, the color of shells ...

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...

Bones rotted and crumbled to powder.[^870] They'd compare it with their
own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and
cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an aspect of the
body internally, externally, and both internally and externally. They
meditate observing the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is
established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge
and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in
the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

### 2. Observing the Feelings  {#observing-the-feelings .unnumbered}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of feelings?[^871]

It's when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling.'[^872]

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: 'I feel a painful feeling.'

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: 'I feel a neutral feeling.'

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling of the flesh.'[^873]

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling not of the flesh.'[^874]

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling not of the flesh.'[^875]

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling not of the flesh.'[^876]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
feelings as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that feelings
exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

### 3. Observing the Mind  {#observing-the-mind .unnumbered}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the mind?

It's when a mendicant understands mind with greed as 'mind with
greed,'[^877] and mind without greed as 'mind without greed.' They
understand mind with hate as 'mind with hate,' and mind without hate as
'mind without hate.' They understand mind with delusion as 'mind with
delusion,' and mind without delusion as 'mind without delusion.' They
know constricted mind as 'constricted mind,'[^878] and scattered mind as
'scattered mind.' They know expansive mind as 'expansive mind,'[^879]
and unexpansive mind as 'unexpansive mind.' They know mind that is not
supreme as 'mind that is not supreme,' and mind that is supreme as 'mind
that is supreme.' They know mind immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} as
'mind immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"},' and mind not immersed in
[samādhi]{lang="sa"} as 'mind not immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}.'
They know freed mind as 'freed mind,' and unfreed mind as 'unfreed
mind.'

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the mind as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the mind
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

### 4. Observing Principles  {#observing-principles .unnumbered}

#### 4.1. The Hindrances  {#the-hindrances .unnumbered}

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.[^880] And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
hindrances?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: 'I
have sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them,
they understand: 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand
how sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up;
and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the future.[^881]

When they have ill will in them, they understand: 'I have ill will in
me.' When they don't have ill will in them, they understand: 'I don't
have ill will in me.' They understand how ill will arises; how, when
it's already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it
doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me.' When they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I don't have dullness and
drowsiness in me.' They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise;
how, when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once
they're given up, they don't arise again in the future.[^882]

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: 'I
have restlessness and remorse in me.' When they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them, they understand: 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me.' They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them, they understand: 'I have doubt in me.'
When they don't have doubt in them, they understand: 'I don't have doubt
in me.' They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.

#### 4.2. The Aggregates  {#the-aggregates .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates. And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
grasping aggregates?

It's when a mendicant contemplates: Such is form, such is the origin of
form, such is the ending of form.[^883] Such is feeling, such is the
origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception,
such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of
perception.[^884] Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such
is the ending of choices.[^885] Such is consciousness, such is the
origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' And so
they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

#### 4.3. The Sense Fields  {#the-sense-fields .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields. And how does
a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to
the six interior and exterior sense fields?

It's when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that
arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that
has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be
abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the
future.[^886]

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter ...

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter ...

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter ...

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter ...

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on
both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes
to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the
abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six internal and external sense fields.

#### 4.4. The Awakening Factors  {#the-awakening-factors .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.[^887] And how does a
mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the
seven awakening factors?

It's when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in
them understands: 'I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
When they don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they
understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not
arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that
has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.[^888]

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles
...[^889] energy ... rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ...
equanimity in them, they understand: 'I have the awakening factor of
equanimity in me.' When they don't have the awakening factor of
equanimity in them, they understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor
of equanimity in me.' They understand how the awakening factor of
equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening
factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.

#### 4.5. The Truths  {#the-truths .unnumbered}

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.[^890] And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four
noble truths?

It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.'

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

##### 4.5.1. The Truth of Suffering  {#the-truth-of-suffering .unnumbered}

And what is the noble truth of suffering?[^891]

Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; association with
the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not
getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping
aggregates are suffering.

And what is rebirth? The rebirth, inception, conception, reincarnation,
manifestation of the sets of phenomena, and acquisition of the sense
fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient
beings.[^892] This is called rebirth.

And what is old age? The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair,
wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
old age.

And what is death? The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise,
mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest
of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
death.

And what is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner
sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who
has experienced suffering.[^893] This is called sorrow.

And what is lamentation? The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of
wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has
experienced suffering. This is called lamentation.

And what is pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact.[^894] This is
called pain.

And what is sadness?[^895] Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from mental contact. This is called
sadness.

And what is distress? The stress, distress, state of stress and distress
in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.
This is called distress.

And what is meant by 'association with the disliked is suffering'? There
are sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are
unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable. And there are those who want
to harm, injure, disturb, and threaten you. The coming together with
these, the joining, inclusion, mixing with them: this is what is meant
by 'association with the disliked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'separation from the liked is suffering'? There are
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are likable,
desirable, and agreeable. And there are those who want to benefit, help,
comfort, and protect you: mother and father, brother and sister, friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin. The division from these, the
disconnection, segregation, and parting from them:[^896] this is what is
meant by 'separation from the liked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering'? In
sentient beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if
only we were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to
us!'[^897] But you can't get that by wishing. This is what is meant by
'not getting what you wish for is suffering.' In sentient beings who are
liable to grow old ... fall ill ... die ... experience sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if
only we were not liable to experience sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress! If only sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress would not come to us!' But you can't get that by wishing. This
is what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering.'

And what is meant by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering'? They are the grasping aggregates that consist of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is what is meant
by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering'.

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

##### 4.5.2. The Origin of Suffering  {#the-origin-of-suffering .unnumbered}

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

It's the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and
greed, taking pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual
pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving to end
existence.

But where does that craving arise and where does it settle? Whatever in
the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving arises and
settles.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.[^898] The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind in the
world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas in the
world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Eye consciousness ...[^899] ear consciousness ... nose consciousness ...
tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness in
the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises
and settles.

Eye contact ...[^900] ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact
... body contact ... mind contact in the world seems nice and pleasant,
and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling
born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born
of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact in the world seems nice
and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Perception of sights ...[^901] perception of sounds ... perception of
smells ... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception
of ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Intention regarding sights ...[^902] intention regarding sounds ...
intention regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention
regarding touches ... intention regarding ideas in the world seems nice
and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for smells ...
craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for ideas in the
world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Thoughts about sights ...[^903] thoughts about sounds ... thoughts about
smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ... thoughts
about ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Considerations regarding sights ...[^904] considerations regarding
sounds ... considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding
tastes ... considerations regarding touches ... considerations regarding
ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving
arises and settles.

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

##### 4.5.3. The Cessation of Suffering  {#the-cessation-of-suffering .unnumbered}

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

It's the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with
nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not
clinging to it.

Whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving
is given up and ceases.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving is given up and
ceases. ...

Considerations regarding ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and
it is there that craving is given up and ceases.

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

##### 4.5.4. The Path  {#the-path .unnumbered}

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion.[^905]

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.[^906] This is called right view.

And what is right thought? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness.[^907] This is called right thought.

And what is right speech? The refraining from lying, divisive speech,
harsh speech, and talking nonsense. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Refraining from killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct.[^908] This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood.[^909] This is called
right livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is called right mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion.

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this
way for seven years can expect one of two results:[^910] enlightenment
in this very life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

Let alone seven years,[^911] anyone who develops these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation in this way for six years ... five years ... four
years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven months ...
six months ... five months ... four months ... three months ... two
months ... one month ... a fortnight ... Let alone a fortnight, anyone
who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for
seven days can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very
life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

'The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 23 With Pāyāsi  *Pāyāsisutta* {#n-23-with-pāyāsi-pāyāsisutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time Venerable Kassapa the Prince
was wandering in the land of the Kosalans together with a large
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five hundred mendicants when he arrived at a
Kosalan citadel named [Setavyā]{lang="sa"}.[^912] He stayed in the grove
of Indian Rosewood to the north of [Setavyā]{lang="sa"}.[^913]

Now at that time the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} was living in
[Setavyā]{lang="sa"}. It was a crown property given by King Pasenadi of
Kosala, teeming with living creatures, full of hay, wood, water, and
grain, a royal park endowed to a brahmin.[^914]

### 1. On [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}  {#on-pāyāsi .unnumbered}

Now at that time [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} had the following harmful
misconception: "There is no afterlife. No beings are reborn
spontaneously. There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds."[^915]

The brahmins and householders of [Setavyā]{lang="sa"} heard, "It seems
the ascetic Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is
staying in the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of
[Setavyā]{lang="sa"}. He has this good reputation: 'He is astute,
competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature,
a perfected one.' It's good to see such perfected ones." Then, having
departed [Setavyā]{lang="sa"}, they formed into companies and headed
north to the grove.

Now at that time the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} had retired to the
upper floor of his stilt longhouse for his midday nap. He saw the
brahmins and householders heading north towards the grove, and addressed
his butler, "My butler, why are the brahmins and householders heading
north towards the grove?"

"The ascetic Kassapa the Prince---a disciple of the ascetic Gotama---is
staying in the grove of Indian Rosewood to the north of
[Setavyā]{lang="sa"}. He has this good reputation: 'He is astute,
competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature,
a perfected one.' They're going to see that Kassapa the Prince."

"Well then, go to the brahmins and householders and say to them: 'Sirs,
the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} asks you to wait, as he will also go
to see the ascetic Kassapa the Prince.' Before Kassapa the Prince
convinces those foolish and incompetent brahmins and householders that
there is an afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there
is a fruit or result of good and bad deeds---for none of these things
are true!"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, and did as he was asked.

Then [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} escorted by the brahmins and householders, went
up to Kassapa the Prince, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side.
Before sitting down to one side, some of the brahmins and householders
of [Setavyā]{lang="sa"} bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite
conversation, some held up their joined palms toward Kassapa the Prince,
some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

### 2. Nihilism  {#nihilism .unnumbered}

Seated to one side, the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} said to Venerable
Kassapa the Prince, "Mister Kassapa, this is my doctrine and view:
'There is no afterlife. No beings are reborn spontaneously. There's no
fruit or result of good and bad deeds.'"

"Chieftain, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view![^916] For how on earth can anyone say such a thing?

#### 2.1. The Simile of the Moon and Sun  {#the-simile-of-the-moon-and-sun .unnumbered}

Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Are the moon and sun
in this world or the other world? Are they gods or humans?"

"They are in the other world, Mister Kassapa, and they are gods, not
humans."[^917]

"By this method it ought to be proven that[^918] there is an afterlife,
there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of
good and bad deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife, no beings are reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or
result of good and bad deeds."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who kill living
creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious,
with wrong view. Some time later they become sick, suffering, gravely
ill. When I know that they will not recover from their illness, I go to
them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view: "Those who kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are covetous, malicious, and have wrong view---when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell." You do all these things. If what those
ascetics and brahmins say is true, when your body breaks up, after
death, you'll be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that there is an
afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. I trust you and believe you. Anything
you see will be just as if I've seen it for myself.'[^919] They agree to
this. But they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger.
This is the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife, no
beings are reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good
and bad deeds."[^920]

#### 2.2. The Simile of the Bandit  {#the-simile-of-the-bandit .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, chieftain? Suppose they were to
arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to you, saying, 'Sir, this
is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' Then you'd say to
them, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly behind his back
with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from street to street
and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum. Then take him out
the south gate and there, at the place of execution to the south of the
city, chop off his head.' Saying, 'Good,' they'd do as they were told,
sitting him down at the place of execution. Could that bandit get the
executioners to wait, saying, 'Please, good executioners! I have friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin in such and such village or town. Wait
until I've visited them, then I'll come back'? Or would they just chop
off his head as he prattled on?"[^921]

"They'd just chop off his head."

"So even a human bandit couldn't get his human executioners to stay his
execution. What then of your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin
who are reborn in a lower realm after doing bad things? Could they get
the wardens of hell to wait, saying, 'Please, good wardens of hell! Wait
until I've gone to the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} to tell him that
there is an afterlife, there are beings reborn spontaneously, and there
is a fruit or result of good and bad deeds'? By this method, too, it
ought to be proven that[^922] there is an afterlife, there are beings
reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and bad
deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Is there a method by which you can prove what you say?"

"There is, Mister Kassapa."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual misconduct.
They refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical.
And they're content, kind-hearted, with right view. Some time later they
become sick, suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not
recover from their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who
refrain from killing living creatures, stealing, and committing sexual
misconduct; who refrain from speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; and are content, kind-hearted, with right view---when their
body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm." You do all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say
is true, when your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me
that there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you
see will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.3. The Simile of the Sewer  {#the-simile-of-the-sewer .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose there were a man sunk over his head in a sewer. Then you were to
order someone to pull him out of the sewer, and they'd agree to do so.
Then you'd tell them to carefully scrape the dung off that man's body
with bamboo scrapers, and they'd agree to do so. Then you'd tell them to
carefully scrub that man's body down with pale clay three times, and
they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to smear that man's body with oil,
and carefully wash him down with fine paste three times, and they'd do
so. Then you'd tell them to dress that man's hair and beard, and they'd
do so. Then you'd tell them to provide that man with costly garlands,
makeup, and clothes, and they'd do so. Then you'd tell them to bring
that man up to the stilt longhouse and set him up with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation, and they'd do so.

What do you think, chieftain? Now that man is nicely bathed and
anointed, with hair and beard dressed, bedecked with garlands and
bracelets, dressed in white, supplied and provided with the five kinds
of sensual stimulation upstairs in the royal longhouse. Would he want to
dive back into that sewer again?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. Why is that? Because that sewer is filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and it's regarded as such."

"In the same way, chieftain, to the gods, human beings are filthy,
stinking, disgusting, and repulsive, and are regarded as such. The smell
of humans reaches the gods even a hundred leagues away.[^923] What then
of your friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who are reborn in a
higher realm after doing good things? Will they come back to tell you
that there is an afterlife? By this method, too, it ought to be proven
that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I have friends and colleagues, relatives and kin who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on. Some time later they become sick,
suffering, gravely ill. When I know that they will not recover from
their illness, I go to them and say, 'Sirs, there are some ascetics and
brahmins who have this doctrine and view: "Those who refrain from
killing living creatures and so on are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm, in the company of the gods of the thirty-three." You do
all these things. If what those ascetics and brahmins say is true, when
your body breaks up, after death, you'll be reborn in the company of the
gods of the thirty-three. If that happens, sirs, come and tell me that
there is an afterlife. I trust you and believe you. Anything you see
will be just as if I've seen it for myself.' They agree to this. But
they don't come back to tell me, nor do they send a messenger. This is
how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.4. The Simile of the gods of the thirty-three  {#the-simile-of-the-gods-of-the-thirty-three .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. A hundred human years are equivalent to one day and
night for the gods of the thirty-three. Thirty such days make a month,
and twelve months make a year. The gods of the thirty-three have a
lifespan of a thousand such years.[^924] Now, as to your friends who are
reborn in the company of the gods of the thirty-three after doing good
things. If they think, 'First I'll amuse myself for two or three days,
supplied and provided with the five kinds of heavenly sensual
stimulation. Then I'll go back to [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} and tell him that
there is an afterlife.' Would they come back to tell you that there is
an afterlife?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. For I would be long dead by then.[^925] But Mister
Kassapa, who has told you that the gods of the thirty-three exist, or
that they have such a long lifespan? I don't believe you."[^926]

#### 2.5. Blind From Birth  {#blind-from-birth .unnumbered}

"Chieftain, suppose there was a person blind from birth. They couldn't
see sights that are dark or bright, or blue, yellow, red, or magenta.
They couldn't see even and uneven ground, or the stars, or the moon and
sun. They'd say, 'There's no such thing as dark and bright sights, and
no-one who sees them. There's no such thing as blue, yellow, red,
magenta, even and uneven ground, stars, moon and sun, and no-one who
sees these things. I don't know it or see it, therefore it doesn't
exist.' Would they be speaking rightly?"

"No, Mister Kassapa. There are such things as dark and bright sights,
and one who sees them. And those other things are real, too, as is the
one who sees them. So it's not right to say this: 'I don't know it or
see it, therefore it doesn't exist.'"

"In the same way, chieftain, when you tell me you don't believe me you
seem like the blind man in the simile. You can't see the other world the
way you think, with the eye of the flesh.[^927] There are ascetics and
brahmins who live in the wilderness, frequenting remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest. Meditating diligent, keen, and resolute, they
purify the heavenly eye, the power of clairvoyance. With clairvoyance
that is purified and superhuman, they see this world and the other
world, and sentient beings who are spontaneously reborn. That's how to
see the other world, not how you think, with the eye of the flesh. By
this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Well, I see ascetics and brahmins who are ethical, of good character,
who want to live and don't want to die, who want to be happy and recoil
from pain. I think to myself, 'If those ascetics and brahmins knew that
things were going to be better for them after death, they'd drink
poison, take their lives, hang themselves, or throw themselves off a
cliff. They mustn't know that things are going to be better for them
after death. That's why they are ethical, of good character, wanting to
live and not wanting to die, wanting to be happy and recoiling from
pain.' This is the method by which I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.6. The Simile of the Pregnant Woman  {#the-simile-of-the-pregnant-woman .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain brahmin had two wives. One had a son ten or
twelve years of age, while the other was pregnant and about to give
birth. Then the brahmin passed away.

So the youth said to his mother's co-wife, 'Madam, all the money, grain,
silver, and gold is mine, and you get nothing. Transfer to me my
father's inheritance.'

But the brahmin lady said, 'Wait, my dear, until I give birth. If it's a
boy, one portion shall be his. If it's a girl, she will be your
reward.'[^928]

But for a second time, and a third time, the youth insisted that the
entire inheritance must be his.

So the brahmin lady took a knife, went to her bedroom, and sliced open
her belly, thinking,[^929] 'Until I give birth---whether it's a boy or a
girl!'[^930] She destroyed her own life and that of the fetus, as well
as any wealth.

Being foolish and incompetent, she sought an inheritance irrationally
and fell to ruin and disaster. In the same way, chieftain, being foolish
and incompetent, you're seeking the other world irrationally and will
fall to ruin and disaster,[^931] just like that brahmin lady. Good
ascetics and brahmins don't force what is unripe to ripen; rather, they
wait for it to ripen. For the life of clever ascetics and brahmins is
beneficial. So long as they remain, good ascetics and brahmins produce
much merit, and act for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans. By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an
afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, place this man in a pot while he's still
alive. Close up the mouth, bind it up with damp leather, and seal it
with a thick coat of damp clay. Then lift it up on a stove and light the
fire.'[^932] They agree, and do what I ask. When we know that that man
has passed away, we lift down the pot and break it open, uncover the
mouth, and slowly peek inside, thinking, 'Hopefully we'll see his soul
escaping.'[^933] But we don't see his soul escaping. This is how I prove
that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.7. The Simile of the Dream  {#the-simile-of-the-dream .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. Do you recall ever having a midday nap and seeing
delightful parks, woods, meadows, and lotus ponds in a dream?"[^934]

"I do, sir."

"At that time were you guarded by hunchbacks, dwarves, midgets, and
younglings?"

"I was."

"But did they see your soul entering or leaving?"[^935]

"No they did not."

"So if they couldn't even see your soul entering or leaving while you
were still alive, how could you see the soul of a dead man? By this
method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an afterlife, there are
beings reborn spontaneously, and there is a fruit or result of good and
bad deeds."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, weigh this man with scales while he's
still alive. Then strangle him with a bowstring, and when he's dead,
weigh him again.'[^936] They agree, and do what I ask. So long as they
are alive, they're lighter, softer, more flexible. But when they die
they become heavier, stiffer, less flexible.[^937] This is how I prove
that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.8. The Simile of the Hot Iron Ball  {#the-simile-of-the-hot-iron-ball .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.
Suppose a person was to heat an iron ball all day until it was burning,
blazing, and glowing, and then they weigh it with scales. After some
time, when it had cooled and become quenched, they'd weigh it again.
When would that iron ball be lighter, softer, and more workable---when
it's burning or when it's cool?"[^938]

"So long as the iron ball is full of heat and air---burning, blazing,
and glowing---it's lighter, softer, and more workable. But when it lacks
heat and air---cooled and quenched---it's heavier, stiffer, and less
workable."

"In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it's lighter, softer, and more flexible. But when it lacks
life and warmth and consciousness it's heavier, stiffer, and less
flexible. By this method, too, it ought to be proven that there is an
afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, take this man's life without injuring his
outer skin, inner skin, flesh, sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll
see his soul escaping.' They agree, and do what I ask. When he's nearly
dead, I tell them to[^939] lay him on his back in hope of seeing his
soul escape. They do so. But we don't see his soul escaping. I tell them
to lay him bent over, to lay him on his side, to lay him on the other
side; to stand him upright, to stand him upside down; to strike him with
fists, stones, rods, and swords; and to give him a good shaking in hope
of seeing his soul escape. They do all these things. But we don't see
his soul escaping. For him the eye itself is present, and so are those
sights. Yet he does not experience that sense-field.[^940] The ear
itself is present, and so are those sounds. Yet he does not experience
that sense-field. The nose itself is present, and so are those smells.
Yet he does not experience that sense-field. The tongue itself is
present, and so are those tastes. Yet he does not experience that
sense-field. The body itself is present, and so are those touches. Yet
he does not experience that sense-field. This is how I prove that there
is no afterlife."

#### 2.9. The Simile of the Horn Blower  {#the-simile-of-the-horn-blower .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain horn blower took his horn and traveled to a
borderland,[^941] where he went to a certain village. Standing in the
middle of the village, he sounded his horn three times, then placed it
on the ground and sat down to one side.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'What is making this sound,
so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and captivating?' They
gathered around the horn blower and said, 'Mister, what is making this
sound, so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and
captivating?'

'The sound is made by this, which is called a horn.'

They laid that horn on its back, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good
horn!' But still the horn made no sound.

Then they lay the horn bent over, they lay it on its side, they lay it
on its other side; they stood it upright, they stood it upside down;
they struck it with fists, stones, rods, and swords; and they gave it a
good shake, saying, 'Speak, good horn! Speak, good horn!' But still the
horn made no sound.

So the horn blower thought, 'How foolish are these borderland folk! For
how can they seek the sound of a horn so irrationally?' And as they
looked on, he picked up the horn, sounded it three times, and took it
away with him.

Then the people of the borderland thought, 'So, it seems, when what is
called a horn is accompanied by a person, effort, and wind, it makes a
sound. But when these things are absent it makes no sound.'

In the same way, so long as this body is full of life and warmth and
consciousness it walks back and forth, stands, sits, and lies down. It
sees sights with the eye, hears sounds with the ear, smells odors with
the nose, tastes flavors with the tongue, feels touches with the body,
and knows ideas with the mind. But when it lacks life and warmth and
consciousness it does none of these things. By this method, too, it
ought to be proven that there is an afterlife."

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I think that there is no
afterlife."

"Can you prove it?"

"I can."

"How, exactly, chieftain?"

"Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to me,
saying, 'Sir, this is a bandit, a criminal. Punish him as you will.' I
say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open this man's outer skin. Hopefully
we might see his soul.' They cut open his outer skin, but we see no
soul. I say to them, 'Well then, sirs, cut open his inner skin, flesh,
sinews, bones, or marrow. Hopefully we'll see his soul.' They do so, but
we see no soul. This is how I prove that there is no afterlife."

#### 2.10. The Simile of the Fire-Worshiping Matted-Hair Ascetic  {#the-simile-of-the-fire-worshiping-matted-hair-ascetic .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain fire-worshiping matted-hair ascetic settled
in a leaf hut in a wilderness region. Then a caravan came out from a
certain country. It stayed for one night not far from that ascetic's
hermitage, and then moved on. The ascetic thought, 'Why don't I go to
that caravan's campsite? Hopefully I'll find something useful there.'

So he went, and he saw a little baby boy abandoned there. When he saw
this he thought, 'It's not proper for me to look on while a human being
dies. Why don't I bring this boy back to my hermitage, nurse him,
provide for him, and raise him?' So that's what he did.

When the boy was ten or twelve years old, the ascetic had some business
come up in the country. So he said to the boy, 'My dear, I wish to go to
the country. Serve the sacred flame. Do not extinguish it. But if you
should extinguish it, here is the hatchet, the firewood, and the bundle
of drill-sticks. Light the fire and serve it.' And having instructed the
boy, the ascetic went to the country.

But the boy was so engrossed in his play, the fire went out. He thought,
'My father told me to serve the sacred flame. Why don't I light it again
and serve it?'

So he chopped the bundle of drill-sticks with the hatchet, thinking,
'Hopefully I'll get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

He split the bundle of drill-sticks into two, three, four, five, ten, or
a hundred parts. He chopped them into splinters, pounded them in a
mortar, and swept them away in a strong wind, thinking, 'Hopefully I'll
get a fire!' But he still got no fire.

Then the matted-hair ascetic, having concluded his business in the
country, returned to his own hermitage, and said to the boy, 'I trust,
my dear, that the fire didn't go out?' And the boy told him what had
happened. Then the ascetic thought, 'How foolish is this boy, how
incompetent! For how can he seek a fire so irrationally?'

So while the boy looked on, he took a bundle of fire-sticks, lit the
fire, and said, 'Dear boy, this is how to light a fire. Not the foolish
and incompetent way you sought it so irrationally.' In the same way,
chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you seek the other world
irrationally.[^942] Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let
go of it! Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. If I let go of this harmful misconception, people
will say, 'How foolish is the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}, how
incompetent, that he should hold on to a mistake!' I shall carry on with
this view out of anger, contempt, and spite!"[^943]

#### 2.11. The Simile of the Two Caravan Leaders  {#the-simile-of-the-two-caravan-leaders .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a large caravan of a thousand wagons traveled from a
country in the east to the west.[^944] Wherever they went they quickly
used up the grass, wood, water, and the green foliage. Now, that caravan
had two leaders, each in charge of five hundred wagons. They thought,
'This is a large caravan of a thousand wagons. Wherever we go we quickly
use up the grass, wood, water, and the green foliage.[^945] Why don't we
split the caravan in two halves?' So that's what they did.

One caravan leader, having prepared much grass, wood, and water, started
the caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he said,[^946] 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. So let's toss out the grass, wood, and
water and restart the caravan with lightly-laden wagons.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and that's what they did.

But in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And all fell to ruin and disaster.
And the men and beasts in that caravan were all devoured by that
non-human spirit.[^947] Only their bones remained.

Now, when the second caravan leader knew that the first caravan was well
underway, he prepared much grass, wood, and water and started the
caravan. After two or three days' journey he saw a dark man with red
eyes coming the other way in a donkey cart with muddy wheels. He was
armored with a quiver and wreathed with yellow lotus, his clothes and
hair all wet. Seeing him, he said, 'Sir, where do you come from?'

'From such and such a country.'

'And where are you going?'

'To the country named so and so.'

'But has there been much rain in the desert up ahead?'

'Indeed there has, sir. The paths are sprinkled with water, and there is
much grass, wood, and water. Toss out your grass, wood, and water. Your
wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden, so don't tire your draught
teams.'

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This man says that there
has been much rain in the desert up ahead. He advises us to toss out the
grass, wood, and water. The wagons will move swiftly when lightly-laden,
and won't tire our draught teams. But this person is neither our friend
nor relative. How can we proceed out of trust in him?[^948] We shouldn't
toss out any grass, wood, or water, but continue with our goods laden as
before. We shall not toss out any old stock.'

'Yes, sir,' the drivers replied, and they restarted the caravan with the
goods laden as before.

And in the caravan's first campsite they saw no grass, wood, or water.
And in the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh campsites
they saw no grass, wood, or water. And they saw the other caravan that
had come to ruin. And they saw the bones of the men and beasts who had
been devoured by that non-human spirit.

So the caravan leader addressed his drivers, 'This caravan came to ruin,
as happens when guided by a foolish caravan leader. Well then, sirs,
toss out any of our merchandise that's of little value, and take what's
valuable from this caravan.'

'Yes, sir' replied the drivers, and that's what they did. They crossed
over the desert safely, as happens when guided by an astute caravan
leader.

In the same way, chieftain, being foolish and incompetent, you will come
to ruin seeking the other world irrationally, like the first caravan
leader. And those who think you're worth listening to and trusting will
also come to ruin, like the drivers. Let go of this harmful
misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create lasting harm and
suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.12. The Simile of the Dung-Carrier  {#the-simile-of-the-dung-carrier .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, a certain swineherd went from his own village to
another village. There he saw a large pile of dry dung abandoned. He
thought, 'This pile of dry dung can serve as food for my pigs. Why don't
I carry it off?' So he spread out his upper robe, shoveled the dry dung
onto it, tied it up into a bundle, lifted it on to his head, and went on
his way. While on his way a large sudden storm poured down. Smeared with
leaking, oozing dung down to his fingernails, he kept on carrying the
load of dung.

When people saw him they said, 'Have you gone mad, sir? Have you lost
your mind? For how can you, smeared with leaking, oozing dung down to
your fingernails, keep on carrying that load of dung?'

'You're the mad ones, sirs! You're the ones who've lost your minds! For
this will serve as food for my pigs.'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the dung carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.13. The Simile of the Gamblers  {#the-simile-of-the-gamblers .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, two gamblers were playing with seed dice. One gambler,
every time they made a bad throw, swallowed the losing seed.[^949]

The second gambler saw him, and said, 'Well, my friend, you've won it
all! Give me the seed dice, I will roll them.'[^950]

'Yes, my friend,' the gambler replied, and gave them.

Then the gambler soaked the seed dice in poison and said to the other,
'Come, my friend, let's play seed dice.'

'Yes, my friend,' the other gambler replied.

And for a second time the gamblers played with seed dice. And for the
second time, every time they made a bad throw, that gambler swallowed
the losing seed.

The second gambler saw him, and said,

> 'The man swallows the dice without realizing\
> they're smeared with burning poison.\
> Swallow, you damn cheat, swallow!\
> Soon you'll know the bitter fruit!'

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the gambler in the simile. Let
go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it! Don't create
lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

"Even though Mister Kassapa says this, still I'm not able to let go of
that harmful misconception. King Pasenadi of Kosala knows my views, and
so do foreign kings. I shall carry on with this view out of anger,
contempt, and spite!"

#### 2.14. The Simile of the Man Who Carried Hemp  {#the-simile-of-the-man-who-carried-hemp .unnumbered}

"Well then, chieftain, I shall give you a simile. For by means of a
simile some sensible people understand the meaning of what is said.

Once upon a time, the inhabitants of a certain country emigrated. Then
one friend said to another, 'Come, my friend, let's go to that country.
Hopefully we'll get some riches there!'

'Yes, my friend,' the other replied.

They went to that country, and to a certain deserted village. There they
saw a pile of abandoned sunn hemp. Seeing it, one friend said to the
other,[^951] 'This is a pile of abandoned sunn hemp. Well then, my
friend, you make up a bundle of hemp, and I'll make one too. Let's both
take a bundle of hemp and go on.'

'Yes, my friend,' he said. Carrying their bundles of hemp they went to
another deserted village.

There they saw much sunn hemp thread abandoned. Seeing it, one friend
said to the other, 'This pile of abandoned sunn hemp thread is just what
we wanted the hemp for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles
of hemp, and both take a bundle of hemp thread and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.'[^952] So one friend
abandoned their bundle of hemp and picked up a bundle of hemp thread.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw much sunn hemp
cloth abandoned. Seeing it, one friend said to the other, 'This pile of
abandoned sunn hemp cloth is just what we wanted the hemp and hemp
thread for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles, and both
take a bundle of hemp cloth and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of hemp thread and picked up a bundle of hemp cloth.

They went to another deserted village. There they saw a pile of flax,
and by turn, linen thread, linen cloth, silk, silk thread, silk cloth,
iron, copper, tin, lead, silver, and gold abandoned. Seeing it, one
friend said to the other, 'This pile of gold is just what we wanted all
those other things for! Well then, my friend, let's abandon our bundles,
and both take a bundle of gold and go on.'

'I've already carried this bundle of hemp a long way, and it's well tied
up. It's good enough for me, you understand.' So one friend abandoned
their bundle of silver and picked up a bundle of gold.

Then they returned to their own village. When one friend returned with a
bundle of sunn hemp, they didn't please their parents, their partners
and children, or their friends and colleagues. And they got no pleasure
and happiness on that account. But when the other friend returned with a
bundle of gold, they pleased their parents, their partners and children,
and their friends and colleagues. And they got much pleasure and
happiness on that account.

In the same way, chieftain, you seem like the hemp-carrier in the
simile. Let go of this harmful misconception, chieftain, let go of it!
Don't create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!"

### 3. Going for Refuge  {#going-for-refuge .unnumbered}

"I was delighted and satisfied with your very first simile, Mister
Kassapa![^953] Nevertheless, I wanted to hear your various solutions to
the problem, so I thought I'd oppose you in this way. Excellent, Mister
Kassapa! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing
the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in
the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Kassapa
has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister
Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From
this day forth, may Mister Kassapa remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life.

Mister Kassapa, I wish to perform a great sacrifice. Please instruct me
so it will be for my lasting welfare and happiness."[^954]

### 4. On Sacrifice  {#on-sacrifice .unnumbered}

"Chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep,
chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are slaughtered. And
the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or beneficial or
splendid or bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
barren field, that barren ground, with uncleared stumps he sowed seeds
that were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged, infertile, and ill kept. And
the heavens don't provide enough rain when needed. Would those seeds
grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get abundant fruit?"

"No, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
slaughtered. And the recipients have wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
and wrong immersion. That kind of sacrifice is not very fruitful or
beneficial or splendid or bountiful.

But take the kind of sacrifice where cattle, goats and sheep, chickens
and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are not slaughtered. And the
recipients have right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.
That kind of sacrifice is very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

Suppose a farmer was to enter a wood taking seed and plough. And on that
fertile field, that fertile ground, with well-cleared stumps he sowed
seeds that were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and
well kept. And the heavens provide plenty of rain when needed. Would
those seeds grow, increase, and mature, and would the farmer get
abundant fruit?"

"Yes, Mister Kassapa."

"In the same way, chieftain, take the kind of sacrifice where cattle,
goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and various kinds of creatures are
not slaughtered. And the recipients have right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. That kind of sacrifice is very
fruitful and beneficial and splendid and bountiful."

### 5. On the Student Uttara  {#on-the-student-uttara .unnumbered}

Then the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} set up an offering for ascetics
and brahmins, for paupers, vagrants, supplicants, and beggars. At that
offering such food as rough gruel with pickles was given, and rough
clothes with knotted fringes.[^955] Now, it was a student named Uttara
who organized that offering.

When the offering was over he referred to it like this, "Through this
offering may I be together with the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} in
this world, but not in the next."

[Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} heard of this, so he summoned Uttara and said, "Is
it really true, dear Uttara, that you referred to the offering in this
way?"

"Yes, sir."

"But why? Don't we who seek merit expect some result from the offering?"

"At your offering such food as rough gruel with pickles was given, which
you wouldn't even want to touch with your foot, much less eat. And also
rough clothes with knotted fringes, which you also wouldn't want to
touch with your foot, much less wear. Sir, you're dear and beloved to
me. But how can I reconcile one so dear with something so disagreeable?"

"Well then, dear Uttara, set up an offering with the same kind of food
that I eat, and the same kind of clothes that I wear."

"Yes, sir," replied Uttara, and did so.

So the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
four great kings, in an empty palace of sirisa wood.[^956] But the
student Uttara who organized the offering gave gifts carefully,
thoughtfully, with his own hands, not giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
thirty-three.

### 6. The God [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}  {#the-god-pāyāsi .unnumbered}

Now at that time Venerable Gavampati would often go to that empty sirisa
palace for the day's meditation.[^957] Then the god [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}
went up to him, bowed, and stood to one side. Gavampati said to him,
"Who are you, reverend?"

"Sir, I am the chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}."

"Didn't you have the view that there is no afterlife, no beings are
reborn spontaneously, and there's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds?"

"It's true, sir, I did have such a view. But Master Kassapa the Prince
dissuaded me from that harmful misconception."

"But the student named Uttara who organized that offering for
you---where has he been reborn?"

"Sir, Uttara gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his own hands, not
giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in
company with the gods of the thirty-three. But I gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with my own hands, giving the dregs. When my body
broke up, after death, I was reborn in company with the gods of the four
great kings, in an empty sirisa palace.

So, sir, when you've returned to the human realm, please announce this:
'Give gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with your own hands, not giving the
dregs. The chieftain [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} gave gifts carelessly,
thoughtlessly, not with his own hands, giving the dregs. When his body
broke up, after death, he was reborn in company with the gods of the
four great kings, in an empty palace of sirisa. But the student Uttara
who organized the offering gave gifts carefully, thoughtfully, with his
own hands, not giving the dregs. When his body broke up, after death, he
was reborn in company with the gods of the Thirty-Three.'"

So when Venerable Gavampati returned to the human realm he made that
announcement.

## Colophon {#colophon .unnumbered}

### The Translator {#the-translator .unnumbered}

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main [Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

### Creation Process {#creation-process .unnumbered}

Primary source was the digital [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} edition of the
Pali [Tipiṭaka]{lang="sa"}. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi. Older
translations by Maurice Walshe and T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids were also
consulted.

### The Translation {#the-translation .unnumbered}

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
[Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

### About SuttaCentral {#about-suttacentral .unnumbered}

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

### About Bilara {#about-bilara .unnumbered}

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

### About SuttaCentral Editions {#about-suttacentral-editions .unnumbered}

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

[^1]: In the suttas, *[apadāna]{lang="sa"}* means "evidence", "traces
    left behind" ([DN
    27:16.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#16.4), [DN
    24:2.7.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#2.7.3), [MN
    15:3.32](https://suttacentral.net/mn15/en/sujato#3.32), [AN
    3.2:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.2/en/sujato#1.1)). The sense
    here seems to have been "(story about) the traces that deeds leave
    behind". The sense "legend of past lives" probably grew out of this
    sutta, and later became the title of the collections of legends of
    past lives of the monks (Thera-[apadāna]{lang="sa"}) and nuns
    ([Therī]{lang="sa"}-[apadāna]{lang="sa"}).

[^2]: *Kareri* is evidently *Miliusa tomentosa*, known as *hoom* or
    *kari* in Hindi. It is related to the custard apple, not the curry
    tree (*Murraya koenigii*).

[^3]: "Past life" is *[pubbenivāsa]{lang="sa"}*, literally "former
    abode".

[^4]: At [MN 71:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn71/en/sujato#14.2) and
    [SN 42.9:4.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn42.9/en/sujato#4.5) the
    Buddha says he recollects ninety-one eons, which must refer back to
    the life of [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}. We shall see the origin of his
    name below.

[^5]: *[Sikhī]{lang="sa"}* means "crested one" and refers to a halo or
    crown. A story of him and his disciples is told at [SN
    6.14:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.14/en/sujato#8.3).

[^6]: *[Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}* is Sanskrit [Viśvabhṛt]{lang="sa"}. It
    means "all-bearing", probably originating as a word for the earth. A
    legendary king of the same name once ruled over the city of
    [Avantī]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    19:36.14](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#36.14)).

[^7]: Due to the appearance of four Buddhas in this cycle it is known as
    "fortunate" (*bhadda*). \| Stories from Kakusandha's day appear at
    [MN 50](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato) and [SN
    15.20:2.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.20/en/sujato#2.8). There is
    no obvious etymology for his name, but perhaps it stems from *kaku*
    ("peak") and thus "the union of the peaks", a valley at the junction
    of mountains.

[^8]: The meaning of [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"} is unclear. In Sanskrit it
    is often spelled Kanakamuni, "the golden sage", while in the
    (dubious) Nigali Sagar Edict of Ashoka it is
    [Konākamana]{lang="sa"}. At [Thig
    16.1:71.1](https://suttacentral.net/thig16.1/en/sujato#71.1) we hear
    the past life of three nuns in the time of [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"}.

[^9]: Kassapa (Sanskrit [Kaśyapa]{lang="sa"}) means "tortoise". It is a
    common Brahmanical clan name, stemming from an ancient figure
    reckoned as the eldest of the "seven sages", to whom some Vedic
    verses are attributed. Details of the Buddha Kassapa's time are
    found at [MN 81](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato), [SN
    15.20:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.20/en/sujato#4.1), and [SN
    48.57:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn48.57/en/sujato#3.1).

[^10]: These numbers make up a quasi-logarithmic scale: the time gaps
    multiply by three, while the number of Buddhas divides by two. In
    eon one there are four Buddhas. Thirty eons ago the number is
    halved, so they had two Buddhas. Twice-thirty eons before that, the
    number is halved again, to one Buddha, thus ending the scale.

[^11]: In ancient India, the "aristocrats" (*khattiya*) and the brahmins
    vied for the prestige of being the highest class. The traditional
    business of the aristocrats was land, politics, agriculture, and
    war, while the brahmins were a hereditary priestly caste who served
    as advisers and ritualists. It is said that the Buddha-to-be was
    born in whatever caste was most prestigious at the time so that his
    word would have the most impact. \| In this sutta, the Buddha simply
    refers to himself as "I" with no personal name. When the seven
    Buddhas are listed at [DN
    32:3.14](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#3.14), however, he
    is called [Aṅgīrasa]{lang="sa"}.

[^12]: The [Koṇḍaññas]{lang="sa"} (Sanskrit [Kauṇḍinya]{lang="sa"})
    originated as the leading clan of the city of [Kuṇḍina]{lang="sa"}
    the capital of Vidarbha, which is probably modern Kaundinyapura on
    the Wardha River.

[^13]: Gotama is an ancient Brahmanical clan name, which like Kassapa
    stems from the Vedas and the seven sages. Why does the Buddha, an
    aristocrat, have a Brahmanical clan? During initiation by a
    Brahmanical family priest (*purohita*), an aristocrat was ritually
    determined to be a brahmin for a short time, during which he would
    assume the lineage name of the priest. After being restored as an
    aristocrat, he and his family would still be referred to by that
    name. Thus the Sakyans' *purohita* must have been of the Gotama
    lineage. Other examples of this practice include the Mallas who are
    called [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    16:5.19.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.19.2)) and
    Saccaka who is called Aggivessana ([MN
    35:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#4.2)). The Jain
    [Ācārāṅgasūtra]{lang="sa"} 2.15.15 records a similar situation, for
    while [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} was, like the Buddha, a *khattiya*, he
    was of the [Kāśyapa]{lang="sa"} *gotta*, and various relatives were
    assigned to [Vāsiṣṭha]{lang="sa"}, [Kauṇḍinya]{lang="sa"}, and
    [Kauśika]{lang="sa"}.

[^14]: *Stereospermum chelonoides*. Dictionaries of Pali and Sanskrit
    call this the "trumpet-flower tree", but that is more commonly used
    for *Oroxylum indicum*.

[^15]: *[Puṇḍarīka]{lang="sa"}* is the white lotus, but here it is the
    name of a tree. The commentary says this is *setamba*
    ("white-mango"). It is not, however, the mango variety known by that
    name today (*Mangifera caesia*), which is not found in India.

[^16]: *Shorea robusta*.

[^17]: *Albizia lebbeck*, sometimes still known by the old name of
    sirisa. Older sources sometimes call it an acacia.

[^18]: *Ficus racemosa*.

[^19]: *Ficus benghalensis*.

[^20]: *Ficus religiosa*, sacred to Buddhists, Jains, and Hindus alike.
    Ancient sources referred to it both as *assattha* (Sanskrit
    *[aśvattha]{lang="sa"}*) and *pippala*. Buddhists today simply call
    it the Bodhi (or Bo) tree.

[^21]: The number of disciples diminishes as we approach historical
    time.

[^22]: An extensive journey of the Buddha with 1,250 mendicants is
    documented in [Kd 6](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd6/en/sujato),
    at one point of which occurs the events of the Selasutta ([Snp
    3.7](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.7/en/sujato) and [MN
    91](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato)). The Buddha is also
    accompanied by 1,250 mendicants in the
    [Sāmaññaphalasutta]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato)) and the Parosahassasutta
    ([SN 8.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn8.8/en/sujato)).

[^23]: The son of King Dawn and Queen Radiant at the City of the Dawn,
    [Sikhī]{lang="sa"} is the streaming rays of sunrise. These names
    recall a solar myth.

[^24]: In [Mārkaṇḍeya]{lang="sa"} [Purāṇa]{lang="sa"} ch. 131, a
    [Pabhāvatī]{lang="sa"}, daughter of the king of Vidarbha, is said to
    have married Marutta, king of [Vajjī]{lang="sa"}.

[^25]: There is an Arunawati River in Maharashtra, not far from the
    ancient homeland of the [Koṇḍaññas]{lang="sa"} in
    [Kuṇḍina]{lang="sa"}.

[^26]: [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"}'s parents King Goodfall and Queen Rainy
    recall a seasonal fertility myth, where they gave life to their son
    the earth, "the nourisher and bearer of all". Note, however the
    variants *[suppatīta]{lang="sa"}* ("well pleased") and
    *[yasavatī]{lang="sa"}* ("celebrated").

[^27]: The names of the brahmin fathers all refer to ritual offerings.
    Aggidatta means "offered to the fire".

[^28]: The names of the brahmin mothers all recall Indian *nakkhatta*.
    These are "constellations" or more properly "lunar mansions";
    segments of the sky through which the Moon passes and which are
    associated with certain stars or clusters. In the Atharvaveda
    system, [Visākhā]{lang="sa"} is the 16th lunar asterism (Libra).

[^29]: Based on the Ashoka pillar there, this is identified with modern
    Gotihawa, southeast of Kapilavastu in Nepal.

[^30]: "Offered in sacrifice".

[^31]: Several constellations are distinguished as "former" (*pubba*)
    and "later" (*uttara*). Since it lies between [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}
    and [Dhanavatī]{lang="sa"}, this may be the 21st constellation,
    Uttara [Āṣāḍhā]{lang="sa"} (Sagittarius/Capricorn).

[^32]: If the dubious Ashokan edict there is to be believed, this was
    traditionally identified with the town known today as Nigali Sagar
    near Kapilavastu in Nepal.

[^33]: "Offered to [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}". Many of the
    [Jātakas]{lang="sa"} feature a king of this name, usually said to
    reside in Benares.

[^34]: [Dhanavatī]{lang="sa"} means "wealthy", but it is also an
    alternate name for the 23rd constellation, *[dhaniṣṭhā]{lang="sa"}*
    (or *[śraviṣṭā]{lang="sa"}*, Delphinus).

[^35]: [Kikī]{lang="sa"} ("blue jay") appears in the story of the past
    Buddha Kassapa at [MN 81](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato).

[^36]: Suddhodana means "white rice". He is mentioned by name at [Thag
    10.1:8.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag10.1/en/sujato#8.1), [Snp
    3.11:7.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato#7.2), and [Kd
    1:54.1.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#54.1.4).

[^37]: [Māyā]{lang="sa"} means "illusion". She is mentioned by name at
    [Thag 10.1:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/thag10.1/en/sujato#8.2) and
    [Thig 6.6:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/thig6.6/en/sujato#6.2).

[^38]: "Principle of the teachings" is *[dhammadhātu]{lang="sa"}*. At
    [SN 12.32:18.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.32/en/sujato#18.1),
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s mastery of the *[dhammadhātu]{lang="sa"}*
    gives him the ability to answer any questions on the Dhamma.

[^39]: These characteristics of the birth of the Buddha-to-be are also
    found in [MN 123](https://suttacentral.net/mn123/en/sujato), where
    Ānanda quotes the Buddha, although the wording is a little different
    and three extra details are added at the start. In addition, this
    detail and that about emerging mindfully from the womb are found at
    [AN 4.127](https://suttacentral.net/an4.127/en/sujato). \| Normally
    in early Pali, the word *bodhisatta* is reserved for the
    Buddha-to-be once he has left home and is practicing "intent on
    awakening" (eg. [MN
    26:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#13.1)). This
    passage extends the usage back as far as the end of the immediate
    past life.

[^40]: "Normal" is *[dhammatā]{lang="sa"}*, a natural principle. This
    entire passage differs from the earliest concept of the bodhisatta
    ("one intent on awakening"), which in early texts is typically
    applied to Siddhattha after he left the home.

[^41]: The commentary identifies this realm of "utter darkness"
    (*[andhakāratimisā]{lang="sa"}*) with a cold hell realm. There is a
    corresponding [Purāṇic]{lang="sa"} hell called
    *[andhatāmisra]{lang="sa"}*. \| *[Asaṁvutā]{lang="sa"}* was
    translated by [Ñāṇamoḷī]{lang="sa"} as "abysmal", but this relies on
    a commentarial cosmology that is not found in the suttas. The sense,
    rather, is "boundless". The root harks back to the Vedic serpent
    [Vṛtra]{lang="sa"} who wraps the world in darkness. \|
    *[Nānubhonti]{lang="sa"}* ("makes no impression") is glossed in the
    commentary to [AN 4.127](https://suttacentral.net/an4.127/en/sujato)
    as *nappahonti* "ineffective".

[^42]: The light is a physical one, not just a metaphor. From this, it
    appears that sentient beings may be spontaneously reborn in
    interstellar space. Compare the problem of the "Boltzmann brain" in
    physics.

[^43]: These are the Four Great Kings, regarded as protector deities.

[^44]: The five precepts.

[^45]: While sensual pleasures provoke attachment, they are nonetheless
    a kind of pleasure and therefore a sign of virtue and good past
    kamma.

[^46]: This tragic detail is also mentioned in [Ud
    5.2](https://suttacentral.net/ud5.2/en/sujato). The Buddha is raised
    by a step-mother, which in our Buddha's case was [Māyā]{lang="sa"}'s
    sister [Mahāpajāpatī]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    8.51:9.8](https://suttacentral.net/an8.51/en/sujato#9.8), [MN
    142:3.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn142/en/sujato#3.3)).

[^47]: Ten signifies fullness and completion, as for example the "ten
    directions". \| The notion that the term of pregnancy was "nine or
    ten months" is also found at [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 5.9.1. In the Rig Veda it is typically "in the
    tenth month" (5.78.7, 10.84.3).

[^48]: In illustrations she is depicted standing while holding a tree in
    the pose known as *[sālabhañjikā]{lang="sa"}*, a common motif in
    Indian art representing the abundance of springtime.

[^49]: [Kāsi]{lang="sa"} is the nation of which Varanasi is the capital.
    Their cloth was of exceptional quality.

[^50]: This passage implies that Buddhahood was destined from the time
    of birth, which stands in contrast to the rest of the suttas, where
    Buddhahood was hard-won by the Bodhisatta's efforts while striving
    for awakening. \| "Stands firm on his own feet" signifies that he
    will be awakened by his own efforts. \| "North" is *uttara*, which
    is also "the beyond"; this predicts his attaining Nibbana. \| "Seven
    strides" signifies crossing over the vast cycles of birth and death,
    especially by developing the seven awakening factors. \| The "white
    parasol" signifies purity and royalty. \| "Surveying all quarters"
    signifies his universal knowledge. \| The "dramatic proclamation" is
    *[āsabhiṁ]{lang="sa"} [vācaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, literally the "voice of a
    bull". Other contexts show that this is is an expression emphasizing
    speech that is dramatic and imposing ([SN
    52.9:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.9/en/sujato#3.2), [DN
    28:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato#1.5) = [SN
    47.12:5.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.12/en/sujato#5.2)). \| At
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 6.1.1 and
    [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 5.1.1 the "vital
    breath" (*[prāṇa]{lang="sa"}*) is said to be "eldest and first"
    (*[jyeṣṭhaśca]{lang="sa"} [śreṣṭhaśca]{lang="sa"}*).

[^51]: Many of the details of the following account were later
    incorporated into the life of Gotama, under the principle that the
    major events of the lives of Buddhas follow a natural order.
    Nonetheless, they are not always consistent with other accounts in
    early texts. For example, in the [Attadaṇḍasutta]{lang="sa"} the
    Buddha says his going forth was prompted by disillusionment and fear
    due to chronic conflict and warfare ([Snp
    4.15](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.15/en/sujato)).

[^52]: In [Snp 3.11](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato), the
    newborn Siddhattha is examined by the dark hermit Asita. These two
    versions are combined in later accounts.

[^53]: Asita did not look at the 32 marks, and he predicted only one
    destiny: that he would become a Buddha.

[^54]: Various "treasures" (*ratana*) or "gems" of a king are discussed
    in such texts as Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 5.3.1.

[^55]: The marks are elsewhere listed in [DN
    30:1.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.2.1) and [MN
    91:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#9.1). Here I list
    the related marks in the [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} as identified by
    Nathan McGovern (*On the Origins of the 32 Marks of a Great Man*,
    Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 2016,
    vol. 39, pp. 207--247).

[^56]: This echoes the posture of the newborn bodhisatta, and has the
    same meaning: that he will become awakened by "standing on his own
    two feet".

[^57]: These leave marks that were seen by [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    4.36:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.36/en/sujato#1.3)). They are
    often depicted in Buddhist art, signifying the perfection and
    completeness of the traces that the Buddha leaves behind in his
    teachings and practice. [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 69.17 lists
    several auspicious marks, including the wheel.

[^58]: Described as "abundantly long" at [DN
    30:1.12.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.12.8).

[^59]: Same at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.36.

[^60]: Tender feet at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.2.

[^61]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.2 has *[śliṣtāṅgulī]{lang="sa"}*
    ("compact or sticky fingers"). The commentary denies that the Pali
    *[jāla]{lang="sa"}* means a physical web. I think it means that the
    fingers and toes were usually held together rather than splayed,
    hence not letting things slip through the fingers.

[^62]: *[Ussaṅkha]{lang="sa"}* means "(curved) up like a shell", while
    [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.2 says "curved up like a tortoise". The
    descriptive verse at [DN
    30:1.21.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.21.12) shows
    that it refers to the tops of the feet.

[^63]: These are presumably the long, elegant rear calves of the Indian
    Blackbuck.

[^64]: This agrees with [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.35.

[^65]: Same at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.8.

[^66]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.102 says kings have a shining
    complexion.

[^67]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.102 mentions a "clean complexion"
    (*[śuddha]{lang="sa"}*).

[^68]: Same at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.5.

[^69]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.26 says those with hairs turning
    right become kings.

[^70]: Here *brahm-* is an adjective from √*brah* + *ma*, equivalent to
    the Sanskrit *[bṛṁh]{lang="sa"}*, having the sense "grown,
    extended". The Sanskrit form here is *[bṛhadṛjugātra]{lang="sa"}*.

[^71]: Hands, feet, shoulders, and chest ([DN
    30:1.13.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.13.5)).

[^72]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.18 compares not the chest but the
    hips with a lion.

[^73]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.27 says the heart is raised and
    muscular.

[^74]: [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 69.13 has the same proportions without
    the simile. These are the normal human proportions, yet we cannot
    touch our knees without bending. The only way these marks could be
    reconciled is if the arms were extra long and the length of the legs
    below the knees was extra long as well. And this is exactly what we
    are told: the ankles are stretched and long, and the calves are like
    those of an antelope, whose rear calves are long proportionate to
    the thigh. Thus in this regard the marks appear to be internally
    consistent, though not describing normal human anatomy.

[^75]: "Ridged taste buds" is *[rasaggasaggī]{lang="sa"}*. *Rasa* can
    mean either "taste" or "nutrition", but the use of
    *[ojā]{lang="sa"}* in [DN
    30:2.9.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.9.8) confirms
    the latter. *Gasa* is "swallow" and per [DN
    30:2.7.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.7.4) it is the
    "conveyance of savor" (*[rasaharaṇīyo]{lang="sa"}*). *Agga* often
    means "best", but this is derived from the primary sense of "peak".
    The descriptors *uddhagga* ("raised") at [DN
    30:2.7.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.7.4) and
    *[susaṇṭhitā]{lang="sa"}* ("prominent") at [DN
    30:2.9.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.9.8) confirm
    that the latter is meant. The mark refers to taste buds raised in
    noticeable ridges on the tongue that absorb nutrition and aid
    digestion. It has often been interpreted as "excellent
    (*[aggī]{lang="sa"}*) sense (*gasa*) of taste (*rasa*)", but this,
    being imperceptible to others, is rather a secondary consequence of
    the mark.

[^76]: Even, gapless, and white teeth are at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"}
    68.52.

[^77]: Same at [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 68.53.

[^78]: At [Thig
    13.1:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/thig13.1/en/sujato#6.2)
    [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} describes her eyes as *[abhinīla]{lang="sa"}*.
    While some Indians do indeed have blue eyes, this probably describes
    a black so deep it appears blue.

[^79]: Cows have long and elegant eyelashes.

[^80]: The *[uṇhīsa]{lang="sa"}* is depicted as a bulge on the Buddha's
    crown.

[^81]: This is the *[dakkhiṇā]{lang="sa"}*, the religious offering given
    in gratitude and respect for the services.

[^82]: His birth mother has passed away and there is no mention of a
    step-mother.

[^83]: Normally clairvoyance and related abilities are said to arise due
    to the power of the fourth *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*, whereas here it
    comes naturally due to past kamma. After *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* this
    ability is empowered by the radiant mind clear of hindrances,
    whereas here it seems to be a more limited ability to see clearly
    and in the dark.

[^84]: [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s name is simply the personal form of the
    word made famous in Buddhist meditation, *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}*.
    This is usually rendered as "insight", but the sense here is more
    like "clear seeing".

[^85]: Indian epistemology acknowledges two fundamental sources of
    knowledge: direct perception (*paccakkha*) and inference
    (*[anumāna]{lang="sa"}*). This passage shows that
    *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* includes both. I render
    *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* with "discernment" in an attempt to capture
    both nuances, rather than the standard "insight".

[^86]: Here begins the story of the four signs that led to
    [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s going forth---an old man, a sick man, a dead
    man, and a renunciate. Later texts apply the same story to
    Siddhattha, indeed to all bodhisattvas. \| These four "signs"
    (*nimitta*) are also called "messengers of the gods", reckoned as
    five ([MN 130](https://suttacentral.net/mn130/en/sujato)) or three
    ([AN 3.36](https://suttacentral.net/an3.36/en/sujato)).

[^87]: *[Antepuraṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("royal compound") was the inner sanctum
    of the royal residence. Maximally it referred to the area enclosed
    by walls within which the ruling families and staff lived. It later
    became used in the more restricted sense of "harem".

[^88]: "Brood" is *[pajjhāyati]{lang="sa"}*. He is having an existential
    crisis.

[^89]: In any story of prophecy, efforts are made to avert it and they
    invariably fail. This is a recursive property of prophetic myth. If
    the prophecy were averted, the myth would not exist and we would not
    know of it; but because the myth does exist, we know how it ends and
    the prophecy must come true.

[^90]: An existential crisis takes its own time; it cannot be rushed.

[^91]: Neither reading *[vilāta]{lang="sa"}* or *[milāta]{lang="sa"}*
    appears to occur elsewhere in this sense. The commentary says it is
    a bier (*sivika*).

[^92]: "Renunciate" is *pabbajita* ("one who has gone forth"), one of
    the many words for religious ascetics. It is a general term and does
    not specify his affiliation.

[^93]: "Celebrate" is *[sādhu]{lang="sa"}*, the famous Buddhist words of
    approval and rejoicing still heard every day in
    [Theravāda]{lang="sa"} Buddhist cultures. It later acquired the
    meaning "renunciate" but does not have that sense in early Pali. The
    virtues that he celebrates are common values of Indian religions.

[^94]: His apparently sudden decision to go forth arises only after an
    extensive period of crisis and contemplation.

[^95]: The idea that a whole populace would follow the bodhisatta on his
    renunciate path occurs several times in the [Jātakas]{lang="sa"}.

[^96]: Following the PTS edition in omitting *janapada*, which is absent
    from the commentary and the parallel passage at [DN
    19:58.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#58.3).

[^97]: This is the only place *[vāsūpagata]{lang="sa"}* ("entered his
    dwelling") is added to this stock phrase.

[^98]: At [SN 12.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.4/en/sujato)--10 this
    same reflection is attributed to each of the seven past Buddhas,
    kicking off an investigation into dependent origination in reverse
    order, starting with the outcome: suffering. Here this is treated as
    a meditative contemplation, whereas the next sutta, [DN
    15](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato)
    [Mahānidānasutta]{lang="sa"}, delves into the philosophical
    implications.

[^99]: The reflection shows how the bodhisatta is still digging into the
    trauma of discovering the reality of old age and death.

[^100]: *Yoniso [maniskāra]{lang="sa"}* ("rational application of mind")
    is a distinctively Buddhist term that literally means "applying the
    mind by way of source". It is mostly used in investigating
    causality, although over time it came to have a more general sense
    of "reflection, inquiry, attention".

[^101]: Here begins the sequence of dependent origination. I give basic
    definitions of terms here, and more details in [DN
    15](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato). \| Rebirth is a
    necessary antecedent condition for old age and death. Note that it
    is not a *sufficient* condition for old age, for many die when
    young.

[^102]: Since there cannot be an end to the "birth" that starts this
    life, *[jāti]{lang="sa"}* means "rebirth", the next stage in the
    ongoing cycle.

[^103]: *Bhava* means "being, existence, life" in the sense of "past and
    future lives". It refers to the ongoing process of continued
    existence, transmigrating through life after life. By itself,
    *bhava* has a positive connotation, and represents the longing that
    many people have to continue to exist after death in a permanent and
    happy state. The Buddha, however, situates it as just one more
    dimension of the flow of conditions.

[^104]: "Grasping" (*[upādāna]{lang="sa"}*) at sensual pleasures, views,
    precepts and observances, and theories of a self ([DN
    15:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#6.3)). Grasping has
    the active sense of "taking up" a new life, not just "clinging" to
    what one has. It has a dual sense, because it also means the "fuel"
    that sustains the fire of existence.

[^105]: Craving (*[taṇhā]{lang="sa"}*, literally "thirst") and grasping
    have a similar meaning, but craving is primal desire while grasping
    is more complex, involving doctrines and behaviors.

[^106]: "Feeling" (*[vedanā]{lang="sa"}*) is more fundamental than the
    complex concept of "emotion". It refers to the hedonic tone of
    experience as pleasant, painful, or neutral.

[^107]: "Contact" is literally "touch" (*phassa*), and refers to the
    stimulation that occurs when sense object meets sense organ in
    experience.

[^108]: The five senses with the mind as sixth. This topic is treated
    extensively throughout early Buddhism, with a special focus on
    understanding and restraining the pull of sense stimulation.
    *Āyatana* has a root sense "stretch", from which derived senses
    include "dimension", "field", etc.

[^109]: "Name and form" (*[nāmarūpa]{lang="sa"}*) is a Vedic concept
    referring to the multiplicity of material forms
    (*[rūpa]{lang="sa"}*) and associated names (*[nāma]{lang="sa"}*),
    especially the individual "sentient organisms" such as gods and
    humans (Rig Veda 5.43.10, [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 1.6.1), which are ultimately absorbed into the
    divine, like rivers in the ocean ([Muṇḍaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 3.2.8, [Praśna]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 6.5). The Buddha treated "name" analytically
    as feeling, perception, intention, contact, and application of mind,
    and "form" as the four elements and derived matter ([DN
    15:20.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#20.8), [MN
    9:52--54.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn9/en/sujato#52-54.7), and [SN
    12.2:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.2/en/sujato#11.1)).

[^110]: "Consciousness" (*[viññāṇa]{lang="sa"}*) is simple subjective
    awareness, the sense of knowing. It arises stimulated by either an
    external sense impression or a mental phenomena such as thought,
    memory, etc. It is the subjective awareness that makes the entire
    multiform world of concepts and appearances possible. Thus far the
    analysis agrees with [Yājñavalkya]{lang="sa"}, who says that the
    manifold appearances in the world arise from consciousness (*etebhyo
    [bhūtebhyaḥ]{lang="sa"} [samutthāya]{lang="sa"}*,
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.4.12).

[^111]: Here the Buddha decisively departs from
    [Yājñavalkya]{lang="sa"}'s view that individuated awareness
    (*[saññā]{lang="sa"}*) returns into "this great reality, infinite,
    unbounded, a sheer mass of consciousness" (*[idaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [mahadbhūtam]{lang="sa"} anantam [apāraṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [vijñānaghana]{lang="sa"} eva*, [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.4.12). Consciousness
    (*[viññāṇa]{lang="sa"}*) is not a fundamental reality
    (*[mahadbhūta]{lang="sa"}*) underlying multiplicity, but rather a
    conditioned process that exists only together with name and form.

[^112]: Dependent origination normally continues with two further
    factors: choices and ignorance. The full series does not appear in
    the [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}. This truncated series emphasizes the
    mutuality of name and form with consciousness, but does not preclude
    the normal linear series. Each presentation of dependent origination
    reveals a different aspect of a complex, ramified process.

[^113]: Note the use of repetition to sum up the main doctrinal
    teachings. This serves to lock the sequence in memory and ensure no
    items are missing or displaced, while for one who is reciting the
    text from memory it provides an opportunity to reflect and apply the
    meaning in their own experience.

[^114]: This phrasing recalls the Buddha's first sermon ([SN
    56.11:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#5.1)), an
    insight that is said to be common to all Buddhas ([SN
    56.12:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.12/en/sujato#1.1)). *Pubbe
    ananussutesu* ("not learned before from another") means that this is
    a fresh insight not passed down in an oral tradition.

[^115]: The PTS edition has *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}-maggo* here, despite
    admitting the term is found in no manuscripts and is taken from the
    commentary, where it is clearly an explanation not a reading
    (*maggoti [vipassanāmaggo]{lang="sa"}*). This error is followed by
    Rhys Davids and Walshe in their translations.

[^116]: Insight into dependent origination here indicates the attaining
    of stream entry.

[^117]: The five grasping aggregates
    (*[pañcūpādānakkhandhā]{lang="sa"}*) are mentioned as a summary of
    suffering in the Buddha's first sermon ([SN
    56.11:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#4.2)). Most of
    the teachings on this topic are collected in the
    [Khandhasaṁyutta]{lang="sa"} at SN 22, but they are also found in
    the [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"} at [DN
    22:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#14.1), [DN
    33:1.11.45](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.11.45), [DN
    33:2.1.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#2.1.4), and [DN
    34:1.6.16](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.6.16). The
    contemplation on the aggregates dispels the mistaken assumption of a
    self. Many of the theorists in [DN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato) identify the self with
    one or other of the aggregates.

[^118]: *[Saṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* in early Buddhism has three main
    doctrinal senses. (1) The broadest sense is "conditioned phenomena",
    which we find in the [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"} at [DN
    16:6.10.10](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.10.10), [DN
    17:2.16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.16.1), and [DN
    34:1.8.59](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.8.59). This
    essentially means "everything except Nibbana". (2) Sometimes it is a
    physical or mental "process" or "activity" as at [DN
    18:24.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato#24.1), where it
    refers to the gradual stilling of energies in the development of
    meditation. (3) In the five aggregates and dependent origination it
    has the sense of "morally potent volitions or choices" and is a
    synonym for *[cetanā]{lang="sa"}* ("intention"). It is defined as
    good, bad, and imperturbable choices ([DN
    33:1.10.77](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.10.77)), the
    latter of which refers to the kamma of the fourth
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* and above. In this sense it is the moral
    "choices" for good or ill that propel consciousness into a new
    rebirth.

[^119]: The radical thesis of the Buddha's teaching is the idea that
    consciousness is merely another empirical phenomena that comes to an
    end, as is also emphasized in the concluding verses of [DN
    11](https://suttacentral.net/dn11/en/sujato).

[^120]: This indicates the attainment of arahantship, the complete
    release from all attachments leading to rebirth.

[^121]: No longer a bodhisatta, he is now called a Buddha for the first
    time.

[^122]: In early Buddhism, the idea of teaching the Dhamma only arose
    after awakening.

[^123]: A similar account is told of Gotama Buddha at [SN
    6.1:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.1/en/sujato#1.4), [MN
    26:19.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#19.2), and [MN
    85:43.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn85/en/sujato#43.2).

[^124]: Here "clinging" is *[ālaya]{lang="sa"}*, from a root meaning "to
    stick".

[^125]: "Specific conditionality" ( *[idappaccayatā]{lang="sa"}*) refers
    to the fact that dependent origination traces the specific
    conditions for other specific things: this conditions that. It is
    not a general principle of universal conditionality ("everything is
    interconnected").

[^126]: "Stilling of all activities"
    (*[sabbasaṅkhārasamatho]{lang="sa"}*) is the cessation of all
    conditioned energies or phenomena. \| "Attachments" here is
    *upadhi*, the things of the world to which we cling and which
    bolster our complacency.

[^127]: The commentary is careful to specify that the Buddha means
    physical exhaustion only.

[^128]: "Not supernaturally inspired" (*[anacchariyā]{lang="sa"}*)
    rejects the Vedic "channeling" of scripture from the Divinity, while
    "not learned before in the past" (*pubbe [assutapubbā]{lang="sa"}*),
    echoing the Dhammacakkappavattanasutta ([SN
    56.11:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#5.1)), rejects
    the oral tradition.

[^129]: "Shrouded" is *[āvuṭā]{lang="sa"}*, which is from the same root
    as *[asaṁvutā]{lang="sa"}* in [DN
    14:1.17.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.17.5) above, as
    well as *[nīvaraṇa]{lang="sa"}* ("hindrance"). All these terms
    ultimately stem from the Vedic serpent [Vṛtra]{lang="sa"} ("the
    constrictor") who wraps the world in darkness.

[^130]: Had he followed this inclination he would have been a
    *paccekabuddha*, a Buddha "awakened for himself".

[^131]: In the accounts of Gotama's life this is specified as
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} Sahampati. This whole passage is a moment of
    high cosmic solemnity and drama.

[^132]: The Buddha teaches on the invitation of the highest divinity.
    This sets a precedent for Buddhists to refrain from proselytizing,
    but rather teach by invitation. These passages are still recited in
    some places to invite a teaching.

[^133]: *[Aññātāro]{lang="sa"}* is an agent noun in plural, literally
    "understanders".

[^134]: Previously he simply reflected to himself, now he uses his
    psychic abilities to ascertain people's spiritual potential.

[^135]: *Indriya* ("faculty") is an abstract noun from *indra*, the name
    of the potent Vedic god of war. In the Vedas, Indra manifests his
    *indriya* by drinking soma. The drug enables him to release his full
    potential and power; originally this probably referred to drinking
    an amphetamine-like substance before battle. Here we see that it
    means something like "spiritual potential" which is unleashed by the
    practice of the eightfold path.

[^136]: *[Pamuñcantu]{lang="sa"} [saddhaṁ]{lang="sa"}* has long troubled
    translators, as the basic sense of *[pamuñcantu]{lang="sa"}* is
    "release". The problem is a long-standing one, for Sanskrit variants
    include *pramodantu* ("celebrate") or *[praṇudantu]{lang="sa"}
    [kāṅkṣāḥ]{lang="sa"}* ("dispel doubts"). I think it is a poetic
    variant of *[adhimuñcantu]{lang="sa"}*, to "decide" or "commit" to
    faith. Pali commonly uses a synonymous verb to reinforce the sense
    of the noun. In [Snp
    5.19](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.19/en/sujato), *muttasaddho*,
    *[pamuñcassu]{lang="sa"} [saddhaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, and
    *[adhimuttacittaṁ]{lang="sa"}* are all used in this sense.

[^137]: In the account of Gotama, he first thinks to teach his former
    colleagues under whom he practiced the formless attainments. Here we
    see the start of a tendency in the legends of past Buddhas to erase
    the education among other spiritual teachers before awakening. Note
    that these two, who will become [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s chief
    disciples, are leading *khattiya* and brahmin sons of the royal
    household. [Khaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} was [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}'s brother,
    and the priest's son was virtually family.

[^138]: *Khema* ("sanctuary") originally meant "oasis". It is common
    name for lakes and nature parks in the [Jātakas]{lang="sa"}.

[^139]: There is a clear distinction between such managed "parks" and
    wilderness regions (*[arañña]{lang="sa"}*).

[^140]: In the early period, there was no distinction between "going
    forth" (*[pabbajjā]{lang="sa"}*) and "ordination"
    (*[upasampadā]{lang="sa"}*). They refer to two sides of the same
    coin: leaving the home life and entering the ascetic life.
    Ordination was originally granted with the simple call, "Come
    mendicant!" (*ehi bhikkhu*).

[^141]: Thus they became arahants, realizing the same truth that
    [Vipassī]{lang="sa"} had.

[^142]: As at [Kd
    1:11.1.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#11.1.4) and
    [SN 4.5:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.5/en/sujato#2.3). One of
    the Buddha's first acts is to empower his students.

[^143]: In the Vinaya of the current Buddha, the recitation occurs every
    fortnight on the *uposatha* ("sabbath"), and it includes only the
    mendicants resident in a specific monastery. Here they gathered from
    all over India.

[^144]: "Black Plum Tree Land" is *[jambudīpa]{lang="sa"}*, the South
    Asian subcontinent, including India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh,
    and Afghanistan. The number 84,000 does not seem excessive, as the
    Chinese pilgrims recorded many thousands of monasteries throughout
    India. In modern Thailand there are around 40,000 monasteries.

[^145]: The verses that follow form the climax of the whole discourse.
    They are known as the [Ovāda]{lang="sa"} [Pātimokkha]{lang="sa"},
    the "monastic code for exhortation". It seems that they were recited
    on the *uposatha* in the days before the establishment of the list
    of rules that is also called *[pātimokkha]{lang="sa"}*. Most of the
    extant Vinayas still include these verses in the
    *[pātimokkha]{lang="sa"}* texts, the Pali being a notable exception.

[^146]: The Buddha redefines *tapas* from painful mortification to
    gentle acceptance.

[^147]: These verses speak of "Buddhas" in plural.

[^148]: These famous lines serve as a succinct summary of the entire
    Buddhist path.

[^149]: "Embrace" is *[upasampadā]{lang="sa"}*, to "enter into". It is
    the same word used for taking ordination as well as entering
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*.

[^150]: Through meditation.

[^151]: The *[buddhasāsana]{lang="sa"}* ("instruction of the Buddha" or
    "dispensation of the Buddha") is the normal word used by Buddhists
    to refer to their own religion.

[^152]: Here "monastic code" means the principles outlined in these
    verses. They are spelled out in more detail in the Gradual Training
    ([DN 2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), etc.), and
    ultimately in the detailed legal code of the
    [Vinayapiṭaka]{lang="sa"}.

[^153]: The "higher mind" is the four *[jhānas]{lang="sa"}* ([AN
    3.90:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/an3.90/en/sujato#3.2)).

[^154]: The Buddha now returns to the present life.
    [Ukkaṭṭhā]{lang="sa"} is the home of [Pokkharasāti]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    3:2.13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#2.13.1)) and the
    site of the astonishing and cosmically significant discourses [MN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/mn1/en/sujato) and [MN
    49](https://suttacentral.net/mn49/en/sujato).

[^155]: Only non-returners are born in the pure abodes
    (*[suddhāvāsā]{lang="sa"}*), from where they realize full awakening.

[^156]: "Order of gods" is *[devanikāya]{lang="sa"}*. I use "deity" to
    distinguish *[devatā]{lang="sa"}* from *deva* but there is no
    substantial difference.

[^157]: This is a list of the major events in any Buddha biography.

[^158]: The lifespan in such a realm can be many hundreds of eons.

[^159]: These are absent in the Pali text at this point, but they are
    mentioned below, and the commentary says they should be included
    here.

[^160]: This is the detailed answer to the question asked by the
    mendicants at [DN
    14:1.13.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.13.6).

[^161]: This sutta with its commentary was translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi
    in his *The Great Discourse on Causation*. It is the longest and
    most complex discourse on dependent origination in early Buddhism.

[^162]: The [Kurukṣetra]{lang="sa"} was an ancient Brahmanical kingdom
    situated in the region around modern Delhi, bordered by the Ganges
    in the east, the [Sarasvatī]{lang="sa"} in the west, the Himalayas
    in the north, and the hills of the Aravalli Range in the south. The
    [Mahābharata]{lang="sa"} climaxes with the battle fought there
    between the Kurus and the [Pāṇḍavas]{lang="sa"}. These events, to
    the extent that they can be established historically, took place
    several centuries before the Buddha. Kuru marks the north-western
    extent of the Buddha's travels. [Kammāsadamma]{lang="sa"} is
    identified with modern Kumashpur in Haryana, about 40 km north of
    Delhi.

[^163]: While we cannot date this text, the fact that Ānanda has
    evidently been studying deep matters for a long time, that it takes
    place outside the Buddha's accustomed locales, and that it builds on
    teachings found elsewhere, suggests that it happened rather late in
    the Buddha's life. At [SN
    12.60](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.60/en/sujato) we find the same
    introduction to a much shorter discourse.

[^164]: At [SN 6.1:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.1/en/sujato#1.6)
    (and [DN 14:3.1.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.1.6) in
    the case of [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}), the Buddha hesitated to teach the
    Dhamma because dependent origination is so hard to see. Ānanda was
    not only learned and wise, he was a stream enterer who had directly
    experienced dependent origination ([AN
    10.92:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.92/en/sujato#6.1)), yet he
    still underestimates it.

[^165]: The sutta introduce subtle variations in the standard formula as
    a means to illuminate hidden implications and dimensions.

[^166]: The Buddha establishes the primary purpose of dependent
    origination: to understand transmigration so as to be free from it.

[^167]: Dependent origination is here taught in "reverse order"
    (*[paṭiloma]{lang="sa"}*, [Ud
    1.2:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.2/en/sujato#1.4)), starting
    with the existential problem: we are all going to die. This factor
    and the next are resultant, so we cannot solve them directly.

[^168]: With this the Buddha denies the promise of immortality in this
    or any other realm.

[^169]: "Continued existence" (or "life") is an encompassing term,
    including both resultant and causal dimensions.

[^170]: "Grasping" and "craving" (together with "ignorance" in the full
    sequence) are the defilements that drive the process on. It is here
    that the practice of the path takes effect, uprooting them entirely.

[^171]: The next three factors spell out the process of sense experience
    that unfolds automatically. Meditation slows it down so it can be
    seen clearly, but the process remains even for the perfected ones.

[^172]: Here we encounter the first unique feature of this sequence, as
    normally the six sense fields appear as the condition for contact.
    The reason for this special presentation becomes clear later on.

[^173]: The mutual conditioning of consciousness with name and form is a
    further subtlety of this presentation. We have met this idea before
    in [DN 14:2.18.43](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#2.18.43);
    it also occurs in [SN
    12.65](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65/en/sujato) and [SN
    12.67](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.67/en/sujato). Again,
    implications of this are explored below.

[^174]: The sequence is recapped in forward order (*anuloma*, [Ud
    1.1:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.1/en/sujato#1.4)).

[^175]: The Buddha now takes up each of the terms in more depth.

[^176]: This emphatic phrasing drives home that "cessation" (*nirodha*)
    is not simply temporary suppression or non-arising, but permanent
    and complete absence.

[^177]: "Rebirth" (*[jāti]{lang="sa"}*) is defined as the birth of a new
    life, not as simple arising.

[^178]: The various terms for "cause" are used as synonyms (*hetu*,
    *[nidāna]{lang="sa"}*, *samudaya*, *paccaya*). The purpose of using
    different terms is not to add nuances, but to reinforce the central
    meaning and guard against the corruption of meaning; if one word is
    lost or misunderstood, the meaning of the sentence as a whole is not
    changed.

[^179]: These realms relate to the kamma that projects consciousness
    into them. The realms of "luminous form" (*[rūpabhava]{lang="sa"}*)
    and the "formless" (*[arūpabhava]{lang="sa"}*) are generated by the
    form and formless attainments respectively. Any other kamma, good or
    bad, pertains to the sensual realm (*[kāmabhava]{lang="sa"}*). All
    rebirth takes place in one or other of these realms.

[^180]: "Grasping" (*[upādāna]{lang="sa"}*) begins with the primal
    desire of the senses, but the three other graspings are rather
    intellectual and sophisticated. Only a grown human being with a
    developed linguistic ability is able to formulate a view to become
    attached to, and likewise with attachment to religious observances
    and vows, and to theories of a self. This is why the bulk of kamma
    is produced by adult humans, rather than by, say, animals or
    children, for whom these dimensions of grasping are nascent.

[^181]: "Craving" (*[taṇhā]{lang="sa"}*) is a fundamental desire or
    urge. Unlike grasping, it is fully active in children and animals.
    Often it has a threefold definition, which we find below, but in
    dependent origination it is usually defined in terms of the six
    senses, which relates it to the items to come.

[^182]: The usual threefold definition of feeling (pleasant, painful,
    neutral) is reframed in terms of the six senses.

[^183]: Here the Buddha introduces another, even more radical, departure
    from the typical sequence. Rather than continue back to contact and
    name and form, he branches out in an entirely new direction. These
    "nine things rooted in craving" are found independently at [AN
    9.23:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an9.23/en/sujato#1.2) and [DN
    34:2.2.31](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.2.31), but only
    here are they integrated with the standard dependent origination.

[^184]: While the purpose of the main dependent origination is to
    disclose the web of conditions that generates the suffering of
    transmigration, here the Buddha looks at the arising of social
    conflict and disorder.

[^185]: In [DN 27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato)
    [Aggaññasutta]{lang="sa"} the Buddha narrates a legend showing how
    these things arise. The point is not that we should not safeguard
    (*[ārakkha]{lang="sa"}*) our possessions. It is, rather, that so
    long as we live in a world where safeguarding possessions is
    necessary, there will be conflict and violence.

[^186]: "Stinginess" is *macchariya*.

[^187]: There are many words in Pali that approximate the English word
    "attachment". Here it is *[ajjhosāna]{lang="sa"}*.

[^188]: "Evaluation" is *vinicchaya*. We like to weigh up and consider
    the pros and cons of different objects of desire.

[^189]: Those who have nothing are grateful for any small thing, and do
    not indulge in picking and choosing.

[^190]: Our senses are tuned to hunt out and acquire pleasure.

[^191]: This is the normal definition of craving in the four noble
    truths, supplementing the previous definition in terms of the six
    senses. Both are included in this sutta to show that they do not
    contradict, but rather reveal different aspects of the same thing.
    It is not just sensual desire that drives acquisition. For example,
    religious people fight over sacred ground or holy objects to gain a
    place in heaven; or else those driven by nihilism go to any lengths
    for alcohol or drugs to erase existence.

[^192]: The threefold analysis of feeling leads to the process of
    acquisition, while the sixfold analysis of feeling leads to
    dependent origination.

[^193]: And now we rejoin the main sequence.

[^194]: People mostly want to enjoy pleasant sensations, in this life
    and the next, but those sensations depend on a constant supply of
    the appropriate stimuli.

[^195]: Name and form are said to be conditions for contact also at [Snp
    4.11:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#11.1).

[^196]: The "set of mental phenomena known as name" is
    *[nāmakāya]{lang="sa"}*. Its function depends not any underlying
    essence, but on the "features" by which it is "made known"; this is
    a phenomenological analysis. \| "Labeling contact" is
    *adhivacanasamphassa*; it is the active process by which the mind
    makes sense of the world by attaching labels to experience. This
    passage reinforces the linguistic significance of
    *[nāma]{lang="sa"}*.

[^197]: The "set of physical phenomena known as form" is
    *[rūpakāya]{lang="sa"}*. \| "Impingement contact" is
    *[paṭighasamphassa]{lang="sa"}*. Here *[paṭigha]{lang="sa"}* refers
    to the "striking" of physical phenomena against each other, such as
    light "hitting" the eye. It most commonly appears in this sense in
    the formula that begins the formless attainments.

[^198]: Labeling moves from the mind to the world; impingement moves
    from the world to the mind. Together they create a dynamic two-way
    process by which we learn about the world and how to make sense of
    it.

[^199]: Contact is fundamentally a meeting, normally expressed as the
    coming together of the sense stimulus (light), the sense organ
    (eye), and sense consciousness. By skipping the direct mention of
    the six senses, the Buddha opens another perspective on this
    process: mental labeling meets sense impingement, each essential to
    the other, and together making contact possible. The analysis itself
    exemplifies this process, as it starts by looking at the process
    from each side, and moves towards integration, seeing them both
    together.

[^200]: Consciousness in dependent origination is normally defined as
    the six kinds of sense consciousness ([SN
    12:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn12/en/sujato#6.3)). The purpose
    of this is to emphasize that the process of rebirth and
    transmigration is an empirical process, which depends on the same
    ordinary consciousness we are experiencing now. Here, once again, by
    skipping the six senses, a new mode of analysis opens up, which
    emphasizes the organic growth of the individual.

[^201]: "Conceived" is *okkamissatha*, literally "descend" or "arrive".
    \| "Coagulate" assumes the PTS reading *samucchissatha* (Sanskrit
    *sammurch*). I believe this echoes the belief that the embryo is
    "coagulated" from the mix of blood and semen. \| Linguistically,
    this passage through to [DN
    15:22.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#22.2) is marked
    with the extremely rare verbal ending *-issatha*, which is the
    middle form of the third person singular conditional.

[^202]: "Miscarried" is *vokkamissatha*. \| "State of existence" is
    *[itthattā]{lang="sa"}*, which is most commonly found in the
    declaration of the arahant that they will no longer be reborn into
    "this state of existence". \| Here "born" is *abhinibbatti*, which
    is listed along with *[jāti]{lang="sa"}*, *okkanti*, and other terms
    as a synonym in the standard definition of rebirth ([SN
    12.2:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.2/en/sujato#4.2), [MN
    9:24--26.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn9/en/sujato#24-26.7), [DN
    22:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#18.4)).

[^203]: The connection between dependent origination and childhood
    development is further explored in [MN
    38:28.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn38/en/sujato#28.1).

[^204]: Now we turn to the mirror side of the pair of conditions.

[^205]: Just as name and form---the organic, sensual, and sense-making
    body---cannot grow without consciousness, so too consciousness must
    acquire a landing or grounding place to be "planted" in name and
    form. \| *Dukkhasamudayasambhavo* ("the coming to be of the origin
    of suffering") might be rendered "the coming to be and origin of
    suffering". However, *dukkhasamudaya* occurs some hundreds of times
    in the sense "origin of suffering" so I take it in the same way
    here. This is supported by the PTS variant reading *dukkhasamudayo
    sambhavo*.

[^206]: This passage continues to employ rare middle forms, this time
    *-etha*, the third person singular optative.

[^207]: This passage explains why the sequence ends here rather than
    proceeding in the usual way to choices and ignorance. Any state of
    being ultimately depends on the codependency of name and form with
    consciousness. Within this key relationship is the extent not only
    of language, but also of wisdom, and the secret to the undoing of
    transmigration itself. One of the many profound implications of this
    is that there is no such thing as a state of pure consciousness
    independent of concepts. \| *[Ettāvatā]{lang="sa"}
    [vaṭṭaṁ]{lang="sa"} vattati [itthattaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [paññāpanāya]{lang="sa"}* should be read with such passages as [SN
    22.56:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.56/en/sujato#5.3): *ye
    kevalino [vaṭṭaṁ]{lang="sa"} [tesaṁ]{lang="sa"} natthi
    [paññāpanāya]{lang="sa"}* ("For consummate ones, there is no cycle
    of rebirths to be found"). \| The [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading
    *[aññamaññapaccayatā]{lang="sa"} pavattati* is spurious, since it
    inserts an Abhidhamma concept from the commentary.

[^208]: The text now turns to an analysis of theories of "self"
    (*[attā]{lang="sa"}*), which is comparable to some of the passages
    of [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato). The Buddha began
    his discourse by stating that it is the failure to understand
    dependent origination that keeps beings trapped in transmigration.
    Dependent origination explains transmigration in a purely empirical
    way by inferring from the mental and physical phenomena we
    experience here and now. Self theorists, on the other hand, explain
    transmigration by introducing a new metaphysical principle, the
    "self" or "soul", by which they assume that the individual has an
    eternal underlying essence.

[^209]: "Formed" is *[rūpī]{lang="sa"}* ("possessing form"), identifying
    the self with the first of the five aggregates. If something were
    really the core essence of a person, you would think it is readily
    knowable. But the Buddha shows that theorists describe the self in
    multiple different and incompatible ways. Each of these draws on
    some more-or-less arbitrary aspect of empirical reality, such as
    "form", to describe an unknowable metaphysical entity that is in
    fact just pure supposition.

[^210]: An example of a self that is "physical and limited" would be the
    body.

[^211]: Such as the cosmos.

[^212]: Perhaps this is the self of "limited perception" ([DN
    1:2.38.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.13)). This
    would be where the mind is aware of something limited, and the self
    is identified with the mental dimension of that awareness.

[^213]: Such as the formless dimensions.

[^214]: The three options ("it is", "it will be so", and "I will make it
    be so") illustrate how the theorist resorts to ever more convoluted
    means to justify the lack of empirical support for their pet theory.
    \| *[Bhāviṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("sure to become") is the root
    *[bhū]{lang="sa"}* with the primary affix *-[ī]{lang="sa"}*, which
    connotes an inevitable future state. \| *Tattha* ("in some other
    place", literally "there") is explained by the commentary as
    *paraloke* ("in the next world").

[^215]: Their surface differences rest on the same underlying
    assumption, so if the assumption is disproved there is no need to
    refute each individual theory. \| *[Iccālaṁ]{lang="sa"}* resolves to
    *iti [alaṁ]{lang="sa"}*.

[^216]: This is the Buddha, who does not theorize a metaphysical self.
    Implicit in this argument is Occam's razor, "entities must not be
    multiplied beyond necessity". Since the self theorists want to prove
    the existence of the "self", it is up to them to supply the grounds
    to support their suppositions. Since they fail to do so, the
    rational position is that there is no self. The Buddha is not under
    a similar obligation to prove the non-existence of the "self", since
    it is reasonable to assume that things do not exist until the
    evidence says otherwise.

[^217]: Having asserted a metaphysical "self", the theorists go on to
    make certain observations and interpretations regarding it.

[^218]: The Buddha moves from theories of the self as form to feeling,
    the second of the five aggregates.

[^219]: For example, identifying the self with the supposed eternal
    bliss of heaven. As with the description of self in physical terms,
    the theorist proceeds from a simple assertion of identity to more
    complicated hypotheses.

[^220]: This is the inverse of the previous. The self is still defined
    *in relation to* feeling, but it is a negative relation. Such
    theories are commonly found in the [Upaniṣads]{lang="sa"}, where a
    prominent thread of analysis systematically rejects all the things
    that are *not* the self (*neti*), before finally arriving at what
    *is* the self (eg. [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"}
    4.5.15).

[^221]: Here the theorist describes feeling as a function of the self:
    it is not what the self *is*, but what the self *does*. At [MN
    38:5.11](https://suttacentral.net/mn38/en/sujato#5.11) (= [MN
    2:8.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn2/en/sujato#8.8)),
    [Sāti]{lang="sa"} describes the self as consciousness, "the speaker
    and feeler who experiences the results of good and bad deeds in all
    the different realms".

[^222]: The Buddha goes on to develop specific arguments addressing each
    position.

[^223]: The Buddha points out the universal experience of feeling, thus
    establishing his argument on common ground. This same argument is
    found at [MN 74:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn74/en/sujato#10.1).

[^224]: The idea that only one kind of feeling can be experienced at a
    time became an adage of Buddhist psychology, but it is not obvious
    to me that it is the case. Here and at MN 74 it is assumed to be a
    shared belief with non-Buddhists.

[^225]: Feeling is part of the fundamental structure of consciousness.
    This argument comes through more clearly in Pali, for the word for
    "feeling" (*[vedanā]{lang="sa"}*) is derived from and still lies
    close to the sense of "knowing, experiencing". Thus the question is,
    "If there was no mind, would there be the thought 'I am this'?" The
    commentary explains that this refers to the bare material realm
    which is devoid of consciousness. The commentary appears to support
    the variant reading *[ahamasmī]{lang="sa"}* here. This makes sense
    in context, for "I am" is the first and most primordial assertion of
    a self, while "I am this" is a more sophisticated identification of
    the self in relation to the aggregates.

[^226]: The theorist avoids identifying feeling as the self, but they
    must identify *something* as the self (as for example,
    [Sāti]{lang="sa"} said the self was *[viññāṇa]{lang="sa"}*).
    Feeling, however, is deeply wound into the structure of
    consciousness, so if feeling were to be utterly absent, no other
    mental phenomena could continue, and there would therefore be no
    possibility of forming a theory of self.

[^227]: Letting go is not just a conceptual matter, it has immediate
    emotional consequences. *Paritassati* conveys the twin senses of
    desire and agitation, for which "anxiety" seems the best fit.

[^228]: This recalls the similar statement at [DN
    15:22.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#22.6). Whereas
    there it was a statement about name and form with consciousness,
    here it is a description of the arahant who has fully realized it.
    Unlike the theorists whose views do not withstand empirical
    scrutiny, the arahant's liberation is based on a direct
    understanding of reality.

[^229]: The Buddha returns once more to the question of rebirth,
    describing various states of rebirth in terms of consciousness. The
    seven planes are also mentioned at [DN
    33:2.3.28](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#2.3.28), [DN
    34:1.8.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.8.11), and [AN
    7.44:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an7.44/en/sujato#1.1).

[^230]: "Plane of consciousness" is *[viññāṇaṭṭhiti]{lang="sa"}*, which
    could also be rendered "station".

[^231]: In the first of these dimensions there is no consciousness at
    all, and in the second there is no consciousness in the normal
    sense, which is why they cannot be called "planes of consciousness".

[^232]: *[Abhinandituṁ]{lang="sa"}*, to "take pleasure in", to "relish",
    or to "delight in" appears in the standard formula for the second
    noble truth, where craving "takes pleasure in various realms"
    (*[tatratatrābhinandinī]{lang="sa"}*).

[^233]: One "freed by wisdom" has wisdom as the dominant faculty.

[^234]: The eight liberations (*[vimokkhā]{lang="sa"}*) are an
    alternative way of describing the meditative experiences of
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*. Elsewhere they are listed at [DN
    16:3.33.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.33.1), [DN
    33:3.1.168](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#3.1.168), [DN
    34:2.1.191](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.1.191),
    [AN:8.66](https://suttacentral.net/an/en/sujato#8.66), [MN
    77:22.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#22.1), and referred
    to at [AN 4.189:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/an4.189/en/sujato#1.8)
    and [Thag
    20.1:33.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag20.1/en/sujato#33.1). At [AN
    8.120](https://suttacentral.net/an8.120/en/sujato) and [MN
    137:27.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn137/en/sujato#27.1) they are
    listed but not called the eight liberations.

[^235]: Someone sees a meditative vision based on the perception of
    their own body, such as through mindfulness of breathing or one's
    own body parts. The first three liberations all cover the four
    *[jhānas]{lang="sa"}*.

[^236]: A meditator grounds their practice on some external focus, such
    as a light, the sight of a corpse, or an external element such as
    earth.

[^237]: This is a practice based on wholly pure and exalted meditation,
    such as the meditation on love, or the sight of a pure brilliant
    color like the sky.

[^238]: The "cessation of perception and feeling"
    (*[saññāvedayitanirodha]{lang="sa"}*) is a culminating meditation
    state of supreme subtlety that often leads directly to awakening
    (but see [AN 5.166](https://suttacentral.net/an5.166/en/sujato)).
    The state itself, like all meditation states, is temporary, but
    afterwards the defilements can be eliminated forever. This
    liberating insight is the consequence of the balanced development of
    all eight factors of the path.

[^239]: This passage emphasizes that this person is fully adept and has
    mastered all the states of meditation. The Buddha claimed such
    mastery ([AN
    9.41:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.41/en/sujato#16.1)), and
    retained the ability even on his deathbed ([DN
    16:6.8.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.8.1)).

[^240]: Here we see the terms "one who is freed" used in two ways. All
    arahants have "freedom of heart" (by means of
    *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}*) and "freedom by wisdom" (the realization of
    the Dhamma). At the same time, one who emphasizes
    *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}* is said to have "freedom of heart" in
    contrast with one who emphasizes wisdom, who has "freedom by
    wisdom". One who has consummate mastery of both
    *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}* and wisdom is said to be "freed both ways".

[^241]: The longest of all early discourses, this dramatic and moving
    narrative tells the story of the Buddha's slow journey towards his
    final passing.

[^242]: After the events of [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}
    retained and consolidated his power. Magadha ultimately conquered
    the Vajji Federation and continued to expand until almost all of
    India was under its sway.

[^243]: According to the commentary, [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}'s anger was
    rooted in a dispute on trade routes. Control of shipping on the
    Ganges was essential for establishing international trade. There was
    a port on the Ganges extending over a league, split half and half
    between Magadha and Vajji. Valuable products were sourced from a
    mountain and brought down for trade, but the Vajjis kept absconding
    with the whole lot. The place is not identified, but Munger, a
    strategic port east of Patna, fits the description. The nearby hills
    have been mined since paleolithic times. It is also likely, as
    maintained in Jain tradition, that the Vajjis disputed
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}'s accession after committing regicide. His
    threatening posture towards the Vajjis is also mentioned in [SN
    20.8:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn20.8/en/sujato#2.2).

[^244]: [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} appears in the suttas as a devoted
    follower of the Buddha.

[^245]: The Vajji Federation harks back to an early settlement founded
    by the legendary [Nābhānediṣṭha]{lang="sa"} in the Vedic period. It
    built its wealth on its extensive fertile plains and the trading
    possibilities opened up by the Gandak and Ganges rivers.

[^246]: While it may seem strange to consult the Buddha on such a
    violent plan, [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} knows from his experience in
    DN 2 that the Buddha will not hesitate to tell him the truth, even
    if it is bad news. It seems he is trying to avoid the downfall of
    tyrants who are surrounded only with yes men.

[^247]: Reading *[yojapetvā]{lang="sa"}* ("had them harnessed"), which
    is found in the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} in similar passages, and in
    this passage in the PTS edition.

[^248]: Ānanda cares for the Buddha in his old age. Shortly after these
    events, Ānanda was entrusted with reciting the suttas at the First
    Council. This discourse would have been composed by him in the years
    following his Master's death. More than a simple interlocutor,
    Ānanda shapes the story as its second lead, a relatable character
    with an empathetic point of view. He imbues the discourse with his
    emotional struggles as he deals with the Buddha's passing and helps
    ensure the future survival of the Dhamma, while still developing his
    own meditation practice.

[^249]: As for example at [AN
    8.12:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an8.12/en/sujato#1.2).

[^250]: Harmony is especially important as the Vajji Federation was
    comprised of several different clans, among them the Licchavis of
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, the [Ñātikas]{lang="sa"} just south of
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, the Uggas of [Hatthigāma]{lang="sa"} (Elephant
    Village), and the Bhogas of Bhoganagara. Some sources say the Vajjis
    proper were another tribe within the alliance. The Videhans of
    [Mithilā]{lang="sa"} are also sometimes included, but several
    sources indicate that they remained an independent, if reduced,
    kingdom until they were conquered by Magadha some years later. The
    Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} and [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"} formed a
    closely allied independent republic ([MN
    35:12.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#12.8)).

[^251]: The "ancient Vajjian traditions" (*[porāṇe]{lang="sa"}
    vajjidhamme*) would have been established with the founding of the
    Vajji Federation some centuries earlier, which ensured that the
    members of the federation would have a voice in the
    Licchavi-dominated union. Compare with the "ancient traditions of
    the brahmins" (*[porāṇā]{lang="sa"} [brāhmaṇadhammā]{lang="sa"}* at
    [AN 5.191](https://suttacentral.net/an5.191/en/sujato) and [Snp
    2.7](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato)), the falling away
    from which is said to be the cause of Brahmanical decline.
    Similarly, the Buddha elsewhere scolds the Vajjis for their
    indulgence ([AN 5.143](https://suttacentral.net/an5.143/en/sujato)),
    suggesting that the decline may have already set in.

[^252]: This advocates for legal protection for women from sexual
    violence. \| For various legal regulations regarding women and sex,
    see [Kauṭilya]{lang="sa"}'s [Arthaśāstra]{lang="sa"} 12.

[^253]: The Buddha will stay at several of these shrines later in this
    discourse. They were sacred groves, maintained by the people in
    reverence for the powerful spirits of nature. \| "Spirit-offerings"
    is *bali*. \| The commentary explains "inner or outer" as inside or
    outside the town.

[^254]: It is an old Indian belief that the presence of holy persons
    provides a kind of umbrella effect that protects the realm.

[^255]: This event is recorded at [AN
    7.21](https://suttacentral.net/an7.21/en/sujato), where the Buddha
    addresses the Licchavis. That chapter of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}
    mostly consists of the teachings found here presented as separate
    suttas. \| The [Sārandada]{lang="sa"} shrine was short walk from
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    5.143](https://suttacentral.net/an5.143/en/sujato)).

[^256]: There is a certain tension here: the Buddha taught these
    principles to the Vajjis, one of which is that the Vajjis should not
    adopt new decrees. It seems that a "decree"
    (*[paññatta]{lang="sa"}*) is more like constitutional law, whereas a
    "principle" (*dhamma*) is more like a behavioral guideline.

[^257]: *[Upalāpana]{lang="sa"}* is used a number of times in the
    Vinaya, where it always has the sense of giving someone something to
    get them to do what you want. It has the same sense at [SN
    3.25:4.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.25/en/sujato#4.13), where an
    enemy king may be bribed with gold from the royal treasury. \| The
    commentary says that [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} himself was assigned
    with the task of weakening the Vajjis in this way.

[^258]: There were several monasteries and hermitages around
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} ([Kd
    2:11.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd2/en/sujato#11.1.1)).

[^259]: Also at [AN 7.23](https://suttacentral.net/an7.23/en/sujato).

[^260]: This especially refers to the fortnightly *uposatha*. Despite
    the dangers faced in the rugged hills around [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}
    ([Kd
    2:12.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd2/en/sujato#12.1.1)),
    the Buddha insisted that all monks of the locality attended the
    *uposatha* ([Kd
    2:5.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd2/en/sujato#5.3.1)).

[^261]: The Buddha encouraged the mendicants to recite the Dhamma in
    harmony ([MN
    103:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn103/en/sujato#3.2)), to resolve
    issues in harmony ([MN
    104:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#14.3)), and on
    the *uposatha* to recite and train in the *[pātimokkha]{lang="sa"}*
    in harmony ([Bu As
    7:4.11](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-as7/en/sujato#4.11)).

[^262]: Picking up from the similar injunction to the Vajjis, this kicks
    off a long narrative arc that binds together the Buddha's invitation
    to abolish the minor rules ([DN
    16:6.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.3.1)) with the
    bad monk Subhadda's seizing on the Buddha's death as an excuse to
    give up the rules, which was the direct motivation for the First
    Council ([DN
    16:6.20.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.20.3) = [Kd
    21:1.1.24](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd21/en/sujato#1.1.24)),
    at the end of which the Sangha agreed not to abolish any rules ([Kd
    21:1.9.20](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd21/en/sujato#1.9.20)),
    a decision that was affirmed a century later at the Second Council
    ([Kd 22](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd22/en/sujato)).

[^263]: The nature of seniority in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} is often
    misunderstood. There is no "hierarchy" (literally "rule of priests")
    in the sense of power-based relationships: no monastic has the
    authority to command another monk or nun. Seniority is owed respect,
    not obedience.

[^264]: This stands in place of the injunction against sexual violence,
    both principles being concerned with the harmful effects of desire.

[^265]: This stands in place of the injunction to maintain the shrines,
    where mendicants would frequently stay.

[^266]: This stands in place of the injunction to look after arahants.

[^267]: Also at [AN 7.24](https://suttacentral.net/an7.24/en/sujato).

[^268]: "Work" is *kamma*, which especially means "building work". Of
    course it is essential to do work, but one should not get too caught
    up in it. The Buddha did not believe that working hard was ennobling
    in and of itself.

[^269]: "Corrupt wishes" (*[pāpicchā]{lang="sa"}*) is defined as when a
    faithless person wishes to be known as faithful, or person otherwise
    lacking good qualities wishes to be known as having them ([AN
    10.23:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/an10.23/en/sujato#6.2)).

[^270]: This item and the preceding two were the downfall of Devadatta
    ([Iti 89](https://suttacentral.net/iti89/en/sujato)).

[^271]: Also at [AN 7.25](https://suttacentral.net/an7.25/en/sujato).

[^272]: Also at [AN 7.26](https://suttacentral.net/an7.26/en/sujato).

[^273]: As at [AN 7.27](https://suttacentral.net/an7.27/en/sujato).
    These "perceptions" are all meditation practices which are described
    at [AN 10.60](https://suttacentral.net/an10.60/en/sujato).

[^274]: These six principles are found in several places, but they are
    not elsewhere called "principles that prevent decline"; for example
    at [AN 6.11](https://suttacentral.net/an6.11/en/sujato) they are
    called "warm-hearted qualities" (*[dhammā]{lang="sa"}
    [sāraṇīyā]{lang="sa"}*). At [AN
    6.22](https://suttacentral.net/an6.22/en/sujato), however, a
    different six qualities are called "principles that prevent
    decline": not relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, being easy
    to admonish, and having good friends.

[^275]: This is the right view of the noble eightfold path, in other
    words, the four noble truths.

[^276]: This epitome of the Dhamma is repeated eight times in this
    discourse, summarizing the teachings in the Gradual Training. It is
    not found in this exact form elsewhere.

[^277]: "Imbued" (*[paribhāvita]{lang="sa"}*) as a mother hen imbues her
    eggs with warmth by sitting on them ([AN
    7.71:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an7.71/en/sujato#2.2)). See also
    [SN 55.21:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.21/en/sujato#2.3).

[^278]: Some editions add *[diṭṭhāsava]{lang="sa"}* ("defilement of
    views"), but since that appears to be a late interpolation I follow
    the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} in omitting it.

[^279]: This is the same rest-house at which the Buddha sojourned on his
    way from [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} to [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"} in the
    [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato)).

[^280]: This was apparently the last time that the Buddha met
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. This encounter is recorded in an independent
    sutta at [SN 47.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.12/en/sujato) and
    expanded into a long discourse at [DN
    28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato). The
    [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} follows this meeting with the record of
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s passing at [SN
    47.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.13/en/sujato), and then the
    lament for the absence of both [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and
    [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"} at [SN 47.14
    ](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.14 /en/sujato). For some reason
    these events were omitted from the present discourse, even though
    they fit well thematically.

[^281]: As at [DN
    14:1.37.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.37.4),
    inference (*anvaya*) is regarded as a valid form of knowledge. The
    Buddha himself is said to rely on inference using the same simile at
    [AN 10.95:10.4](https://suttacentral.net/an10.95/en/sujato#10.4).

[^282]: This is modern Patna. In this account we see how it was
    developed from the simple riverside village of
    [Pāṭaligāma]{lang="sa"} to the citadel of [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"}.
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} ultimately moved the capital of Magadha from
    the defensively-postured [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} surrounded by hills
    to this trading center on open waters. Under Ashoka it became one of
    the greatest cities of the ancient world. It was named after the
    *[pāṭalī]{lang="sa"}* tree (*Stereospermum chelonoides*), known as
    *patala* in Hindi.

[^283]: Also at [AN 5.213](https://suttacentral.net/an5.213/en/sujato),
    [Ud 8.6:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.6/en/sujato#4.1), [DN
    33:2.1.36](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#2.1.36), and [Kd
    1:28.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#28.4.1).

[^284]: The Buddha begins with the things most obvious and pertinent to
    the audience.

[^285]: Bewildered by fear and regret.

[^286]: *[Suññāgāra]{lang="sa"}* normally means an "empty dwelling", but
    here the commentary describes it as a curtained-off cubicle.

[^287]: [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} was no dawdler, as he preceded the Buddha
    to [Pāṭaligāma]{lang="sa"}. And not long after, he returned to
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} to build more fortifications there ([MN
    108:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn108/en/sujato#6.2)). \| *Nagara*
    here means "citadel, fortress", not "city". It has the same sense as
    *pura*. The construction is defensive and may well have begun before
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} began thinking of invading.

[^288]: The relation between deities and building sites (*vatthu*)
    appears only in this passage in the early texts (repeated at [Ud
    8.6:15.2](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.6/en/sujato#15.2) and [Kd
    1:28.7.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#28.7.3)).
    Divination and geomancy (*[vatthuvijjā]{lang="sa"}*) for building
    sites is said to be a wrong livelihood at [DN
    1:1.21.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.21.2).

[^289]: From this point, later texts always refer to
    [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"}, but the reason for the change of name from
    [Pāṭaligāma]{lang="sa"} is not explained in the commentary. *Putta*
    is a suffix indicating the people of a certain clan or place, so
    *[pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"}* means "a person from [Pāṭalī]{lang="sa"}
    (village)" or as we might say, "[Pāṭalian]{lang="sa"}". As the city
    became well known and its identity as a village receded, it must
    have become known as the "city of the [Pāṭaliputtas]{lang="sa"}" and
    hence simply [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"}. Compare the uses of
    *[ñātika]{lang="sa"}* below. \| The commentary explains that
    *[puṭabhedanaṁ]{lang="sa"}* refers to the "opening of packages",
    signifying that it was a center of trade. This usage is attested as
    late as the 13th century Jain [Vividhatīrthakalpa]{lang="sa"} of
    [Jinaprabhasūri]{lang="sa"}.

[^290]: Excavations reveal that [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"} was constructed
    of wood, so the danger of fire was real. It is situated on a
    low-lying flood plain of the Ganges, so flooding would also have
    been an obvious danger. As for dissension (*mithubheda*),
    [Vassakāra]{lang="sa"} had indicated that this was a means of
    bringing down the Vajjis, so it would seem that kamma was lying in
    wait for them.

[^291]: This is the *[anumodanā]{lang="sa"}* recited for the meal
    offering. Other examples are found at [Snp
    3.7:34.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.7/en/sujato#34.3) = [MN
    92:25.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn92/en/sujato#25.6), [SN
    55.26:20.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.26/en/sujato#20.1), [Kd
    1:15.14.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#15.14.4),
    and [Kd
    1:1.5.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.5.1). \| It
    is worth noting that no early *[anomodanā]{lang="sa"}* uses the
    imperative verb form *-tu* signifying giving a blessing (eg.
    *bhavatu [sabbamaṅgalaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, "may all blessings be"). They
    strictly use the indicative *-ti* to teach cause and effect: if you
    do this, that happens.

[^292]: Buddhism promotes good neighborliness with all beings, seen and
    unseen. Making an offering to the local spirits helps create a
    positive and healthy sense of place.

[^293]: At [AN 4.67:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.67/en/sujato#8.3)
    a similar sentiment is expressed for animals.

[^294]: The "ford" (*tittha*) is symbolic; those who forge a path to
    salvation are called *titthakara*, such as the six leading ascetics
    of [DN 2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato). Today there is a
    5.7 km bridge at this crossing, which is appropriately called the
    Mahatma Gandhi Setu.

[^295]: "Dinghy" translates *[uḷumpa]{lang="sa"}*.

[^296]: In this stock phrase, we sometimes find
    *[paccuṭṭhāsi]{lang="sa"}* ("landed") and sometimes
    *[pāturahosi]{lang="sa"}* ("reappeared").

[^297]: *[Aṇṇavaṁ]{lang="sa"}* cannot mean "sea" here, since it is to be
    crossed with a bridge.

[^298]: [Koṭigāma]{lang="sa"} lay a short distance from the Ganges. The
    Buddha's stay here must therefore have followed the events of [SN
    47.14](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.14/en/sujato) at
    [Ukkacelā]{lang="sa"} on the Vajjian bank of the Ganges, where he
    laments the passing of [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and
    [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}. He would have heard of
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s passing before then, while on the road from
    [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"} to [Pāṭaligāma]{lang="sa"}, even though that is
    implausibly said to have happened at [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} ([SN
    47.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.13/en/sujato)).

[^299]: Also at [SN 56.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.21/en/sujato).

[^300]: [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} (also spelled *[nātika]{lang="sa"}*, or
    *[nādika]{lang="sa"}*; Sanskrit *[jñātṛka]{lang="sa"}*;
    [Prākrit]{lang="sa"} *[nāyika]{lang="sa"}*) was the clan to which
    the Jain leader [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} (called
    [Nāṭaputta]{lang="sa"}, i.e. [Ñātiputta]{lang="sa"}) belonged. Here
    it is unusually spelled in plural, which means "the land of the
    [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} clan".

[^301]: Here [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} is in singular and appears to be the
    name of a town. Thus [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} is first of all a name of a
    clan, then the land they live in, then their chief town. \| Over a
    millennium previously, the Indus Valley Civilization had built
    cities of fired brick with standardized size and construction
    methods, but in the Buddha's day most buildings were wood. This is
    the only brick building mentioned in the suttas; brick construction
    is also discussed in the Vinaya.

[^302]: It is unprecedented to discuss the spiritual destinies of an
    entire town like this. Normally this question is only asked when
    specific individuals known to the Buddha have passed away. Likely
    the passage was created in the wake of the passing of
    [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} to show that even his own people were
    enthusiastic Buddhists. This portion of the text is also found at
    [SN 55.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.8/en/sujato).

[^303]: [SN 55.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.9/en/sujato) inserts
    another series on a monk, nun, layman, and laywoman all called
    Asoka.

[^304]: This portion of the text is at [SN
    55.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.10/en/sujato). I spell names
    consistently with there.

[^305]: The suttas consistently depict lay folk as attaining the third
    stage of awakening, non-return, but not the highest stage of
    arahantship, except in rare cases on the deathbed. The tradition
    extended this by saying that if a lay person becomes an arahant,
    they must ordain or die that day, but this is not supported in the
    early texts. The point is not whether you receive an ordination, but
    whether you let go of attachments.

[^306]: The commentary to the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} attributes the large
    number of deaths to a recent plague (*[ahivātaroga]{lang="sa"}*,
    "viper's breath disease"). This deadly contagion was known to kill
    off entire families ([Kd
    1:50.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#50.1.1)).
    According to the commentaries, the same disease once afflicted
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, prompting the teaching of the Ratanasutta ([Snp
    2.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.1/en/sujato), [Kp
    6](https://suttacentral.net/kp6/en/sujato)).

[^307]: Mirrors are for doing makeup ([DN
    1:1.16.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.16.2)) or
    admiring oneself ([MN
    77:33.18](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#33.18)), which a
    mendicant should not do ([Kd
    15:2.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd15/en/sujato#2.4.1)). In
    the Dhamma a mirror is for self-reflection ([MN
    61:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn61/en/sujato#8.2)), while the
    mind is purified like polishing a mirror ([AN
    3.70:13.4](https://suttacentral.net/an3.70/en/sujato#13.4)).

[^308]: The four principles that follow are elsewhere identified as four
    factors of stream-entry ([AN
    9.27](https://suttacentral.net/an9.27/en/sujato)). At [SN
    12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41/en/sujato), understanding of
    dependent origination is included.

[^309]: "Experiential" is *avecca*, literally "having undergone".
    "Experiential confidence" is the faith of a stream-enterer, who has
    seen for themselves.

[^310]: They have experiential confidence in the Buddha as a teacher
    because they have followed his path and realized the results that he
    speaks of.

[^311]: A stream-enterer has direct experience of the four noble truths,
    so they have confirmed that the teaching is indeed realizable in
    this very life.

[^312]: The suttas distinguish between two senses of
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. The "mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}"
    (*[bhikkhusaṅgha]{lang="sa"}*) is the conventional community of
    monks and nuns. The "[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of disciples"
    (*[sāvakasaṅgha]{lang="sa"}*) is classified as fourfold according to
    the stages of awakening: stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and
    perfection. Each of these stages is further subdivided into those of
    the path who are practicing for realization and those of the fruit
    who have realized. These are referred to as "noble disciples", four
    of the path and four of the fruit, making eight individuals in
    total.

[^313]: This entails keeping the five precepts at a minimum.

[^314]: [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"} means "protector of mangoes". Here the
    text just says she had a "grove", but it is identified as a mango
    grove below ([DN
    16:2.14.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#2.14.1)).

[^315]: In some versions, the Buddha is said to have taught the monks
    mindfulness in anticipation of the arrival of the beautiful
    courtesan.

[^316]: In the Gradual Training the mendicant "establishes mindfulness"
    to begin meditation. Here this practice is expanded, and in [DN
    22](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato) it is expanded even
    further.

[^317]: The locative idiom *[kāye]{lang="sa"} [kāyānupassī]{lang="sa"}*
    indicates that the meditator focuses on a particular aspect of body
    contemplation, such as observing the breath, awareness of the body
    parts, or reflection on the four elements. \| "Rid of desire and
    aversion for the world" refers to clearing the mind through the
    previous practice of sense restraint.

[^318]: *[Dhammā]{lang="sa"}* here refers to the "principles" of cause
    and effect and the four noble truths which are understood by
    reflecting on the psychology of meditation itself. In this context
    *[dhammā]{lang="sa"}* does not mean "mental objects" or "phenomena"
    or "mental qualities".

[^319]: A *[gaṇikā]{lang="sa"}* was a trained entertainer and escort
    whose company commanded a high fee ([Kd
    8:1.1.7](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd8/en/sujato#1.1.7)). It
    was a respected position, as we see the city guild of
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, with King [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}'s blessing,
    appoint the young woman [Sālavatī]{lang="sa"} in a similar position
    ([Kd
    8:1.2.13](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd8/en/sujato#1.2.13)).

[^320]: The text spends more time on the Vajjis' appearance than on
    [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s. At [Thig
    15.1:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/thig15.1/en/sujato#12.1) the nun
    [Isidāsī]{lang="sa"} recalls how she used to do the makeup for her
    husband every day, like his own personal beautician.

[^321]: There are various reading for *[paṭivaṭṭesi]{lang="sa"}*. The
    commentary glosses with *pahari* ("struck, collided").

[^322]: The derogatory indeclinable vocative *je* is otherwise used of
    the "naughty maid" [Kāḷī]{lang="sa"} at [MN
    21:9.13](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#9.13). "Wench" is a
    term meant to insult on the basis of servitude or promiscuity, so it
    seems appropriate. The Licchavis are not distinguishing themselves
    here; given their youth, wealth, licentiousness, and evident
    familiarity with [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}, it seems safe to conclude
    that they had been her clients.

[^323]: *Dassatha* is second future plural of *[dadāti]{lang="sa"}*. The
    Vinaya parallel at [Kd
    6:30.4.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd6/en/sujato#30.4.5) uses
    optative forms instead. \| "With provinces" is
    *[sāhāraṁ]{lang="sa"}* (literally "with food", commentary:
    *[sajanapadaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) refers to the holdings around the city
    that supplied food and other necessities.

[^324]: Despite the context, *[ambakā]{lang="sa"}* has no etymological
    relation to *amba* ("mango") but is a term for "woman, mother", used
    here as a play on words.

[^325]: This demonstrates that a woman of [Ambapālī]{lang="sa"}'s
    profession could own land and control significant resources.

[^326]: An *[ārāma]{lang="sa"}* is a tended and pleasant ground, a
    "park". Here it has previously been referred to as "grove" (*vana*)
    and "mango grove". Usually in the suttas, however, it is a name for
    a place where monastics live. In English, monastics don't live in
    parks, they live in monasteries. So once a place has been dedicated
    for the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, I translate *[ārāma]{lang="sa"}* as
    "monastery".

[^327]: Pali texts waver between *beluva* ("wood-apple") and
    *[veḷuva]{lang="sa"}* (from *[veḷuvant]{lang="sa"}*, "full of
    bamboo").

[^328]: The Buddha was travelling with a large retinue, which could
    become burdensome on a small village if they were to stay the three
    months of the rains residence. The texts note several monasteries
    and places to stay around [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}.

[^329]: Here *[upaṭṭhāka]{lang="sa"}* refers to the lay devotees. \|
    *Apaloketi* ("take leave") also has a literal sense of "glance
    back"; both senses are found in the sutta (see [DN
    16:4.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.1.2)).

[^330]: "Life force" is *[jīvitasaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* whereas below we
    find *[āyusaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* ([DN
    16:3.10.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.10.1)). They
    are evidently synonyms; [Ps
    1.6:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/ps1.6/en/sujato#4.3) refers to the
    three *[jīvitasaṅkhāras]{lang="sa"}* from [MN
    43:24.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn43/en/sujato#24.2), but there
    the text has *[āyusaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}*. *[Saṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}*
    could be interpreted here either as "volition" ("will to live") or
    as "life force" (i.e. the vital energy that sustains life).
    Elsewhere, however, *[āyusaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* clearly means "life
    force" ([SN
    20.6:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn20.6/en/sujato#3.2), [MN
    43:23.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn43/en/sujato#23.1)).

[^331]: This is the first indication of Ānanda's fragile emotional state
    in the days to come. \| Read *[diṭṭhā]{lang="sa"}* (= Sanskrit
    *[diṣṭyā]{lang="sa"}*), "fantastic, how fortunate", per [DN
    26:21.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#21.9) and [Ja
    81:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ja81/en/sujato#1.4).

[^332]: Previously the Buddha had spoken of "taking leave" of the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, but here something more specific is meant.
    *[Udāharati]{lang="sa"}* is typically used when a
    previously-mentioned matter (often unpleasant) is "brought up", as
    at the monastic procedures for confession or invitation to admonish
    ([Kd
    1:16.2.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#16.2.5), [Kd
    1:2.1.9](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#2.1.9)).
    Ānanda is implying that there is some unfinished disciplinary
    business that needs attention. Despite the Buddha's response, he did
    in fact go on to make a number of statements and rulings.

[^333]: For forty-five years he had been teaching and supporting the
    community.

[^334]: A principle not followed by some contemporary Buddhist schools
    that harbor "secret teachings".

[^335]: "Closed fist of a teacher" is *[ācariyamuṭṭhi]{lang="sa"}*.

[^336]: *[Pariharissāmi]{lang="sa"}* needs careful parsing with regard
    to tenses. The general meaning is to "carry about" or "maintain,
    nurture". The Buddha elsewhere said that he "leads" the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    26:25.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#25.6):
    *[pariharāmi]{lang="sa"}*). When the Buddha was about to go on
    retreat, [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"} said that he and
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} "shall lead" (*[pariharissāmi]{lang="sa"}*),
    to which the Buddha said they "should lead" ([MN
    67:13.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn67/en/sujato#13.7):
    *[parihareyyaṁ]{lang="sa"}*). Devadatta, on the other hand, ensured
    his downfall when he determined that he "shall lead" the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, having taken over from the Buddha ([AN
    5.100:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.100/en/sujato#2.3), [Kd
    1:2.1.23](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#2.1.23)).
    Thus the future tense indicates the determination to lead. But at
    this point, the Buddha's mind is already set on letting go. He is
    not saying that no-one should lead the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, but that
    it is up to whoever leads it to address the issues.

[^337]: The reading and derivation of *[veṭhamissakena]{lang="sa"}* are
    unclear. As a form of violence we find *[veṭhamissena]{lang="sa"}*
    at [Thag 2.12:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.12/en/sujato#1.1),
    notably also in instrumental. *[Veṭha]{lang="sa"}* means "twist,
    strap, turban". *Missa* means "mixed" or "plaited" ([Bu Ss
    2:2.1.21](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss2/en/sujato#2.1.21)).
    Thus it probably refers to a kind of strong twisted material used to
    tie or bind, i.e. rope.

[^338]: Compare Rig Veda 8.48.5: "As leather binds a chariot, soma knits
    my joints together." [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.3.35 compares the labored breathing of one
    near death with the creaking of a heavily-laden cart.

[^339]: The suttas say little about this signless (*animitta*)
    meditation. Its defining characteristic is that consciousness does
    not "follow after signs" (*[nimittānusāri]{lang="sa"}
    [viññāṇaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, eg. [AN
    6.13:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/an6.13/en/sujato#5.3)). This is
    explained in [MN
    138:10.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn138/en/sujato#10.2) as not
    being distracted or affected by the features of sense impressions,
    as the "signs" are created by greed, hate, and delusion ([MN
    43:37.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn43/en/sujato#37.1)). The mental
    unification (*[ekattaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) based on this practice is
    listed after the form (and formless) *[jhānas]{lang="sa"}*, so it is
    very advanced. It is nonetheless a conditioned state ([MN
    121:11.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn121/en/sujato#11.4)), so it is
    possible that a mendicant might fall from it and disrobe ([AN
    6.60:8.10](https://suttacentral.net/an6.60/en/sujato#8.10)). However
    it may also be used to describe the meditation of an arahant ([SN
    41.7:6.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.7/en/sujato#6.12)). It is
    clear from [MN
    121:10.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn121/en/sujato#10.5) that the
    six senses are still functioning, unlike in deep serenity
    meditations. It seems that in such a state, the Buddha was able to
    function normally while seeing through the pain in his body.

[^340]: This central theme of the Buddha's teaching---that each of us is
    responsible for our own salvation---becomes even more important as
    the Buddha's days grow short.

[^341]: Read *tama(t)agge* with *tama* as superlative, literally "at the
    peak of the best".

[^342]: This detail is often mentioned in texts of the
    [Sarvāstivāda]{lang="sa"} school, but rarely in Pali.

[^343]: Normally *kappa* as a period of time means "eon", but the late
    canonical texts [Kathāvatthu]{lang="sa"} ([Kv
    11.5](https://suttacentral.net/kv11.5)) and
    [Milindapañha]{lang="sa"} ([Mil
    5.1.10](https://suttacentral.net/mil5.1.10)) argue that it means the
    "lifespan", an interpretation followed by the commentaries. Support
    for this comes from [DN
    26:28.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#28.3), which says
    that "long life" for a mendicant is the four bases of psychic power
    which enable you to remain for the *kappa*. Here it is surely
    talking about a full lifespan. Underlying this is the idea that in
    different epochs the "proper lifespan" varies; in the Buddha's day
    it was one hundred years ([DN
    14:1.7.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.7.7)). We can
    resolve the problem if we read *kappa* here, not as a period of
    time, but as "proper, fitting", i.e. the "proper" lifespan of a
    hundred years.

[^344]: Here Ānanda's mind is "as if" possessed (*[yathā]{lang="sa"}*),
    but in the Vinaya *[yathā]{lang="sa"}* is missing: he is possessed
    ([Kd
    1:1.10.17](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.10.17)).
    Remember, Ānanda is telling this story about himself.

[^345]: [Māra]{lang="sa"} is the Buddhist deity of death, sex, and
    delusion; his aim is to trap beings in transmigration. He appears in
    many guises, both real and metaphorical, throughout the canon, but
    this sequence is his only direct appearance in the
    [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}. Here he feigns compassion, urging the
    Buddha to find his final peace; but he has an ulterior motive, for
    with the Buddha's passing [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s job will be much
    easier.

[^346]: *[Parinibbāna]{lang="sa"}* means "extinguishment", as of a
    flame. Here it appears as both noun ("extinguishment") and verb
    ("become extinguished"). It is not a particularly difficult term to
    translate. Linguistically it has nothing to do with "attachment", so
    renderings such as "unbinding" are untenable. It should be
    translated rather than just keeping "[Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}", not
    least because English resists verbifying adopted words, resulting in
    such constructions as "enter [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}", which reifies it
    in a way that the Pali does not.

[^347]: [Māra]{lang="sa"} is citing the Buddha's words for his own
    purpose. The Pali tradition does not say when this encounter took
    place, but the Sanskrit [Sarvāstivāda]{lang="sa"}
    [Catuṣparisatsūtra]{lang="sa"} places it shortly after the Buddha's
    awakening.

[^348]: This passage makes it clear that it was the Buddha's intention
    from the beginning to establish an order of nuns
    (*[bhikkhunī]{lang="sa"}*).

[^349]: This passage is the narrative inverse of the occasion when
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} begged the Buddha to teach ([SN
    6.1:5.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.1/en/sujato#5.5), etc.).
    Throughout, the sutta artfully preserves a degree of narrative
    ambiguity. Here it almost appears as if the Buddha assents to
    passing away because of [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s request, although his
    intent was clear earlier. [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s reasoning, moreover,
    is based on the Buddha's own words.

[^350]: It seems that at this point, the Buddha is still spending the
    rains in Beluva village, from where he would sometimes go to nearby
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} for alms, or to a local shrine for meditation.
    He left [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} only after holding a meeting for all the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, which probably signified the completion of the
    rains ([DN
    16:4.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.1.2)). If this
    reasoning is correct---and the text is not explicit---then he made
    this statement during the rains retreat. If, however, this reasoning
    is incorrect and we are already after the rains, it could not have
    been long after. Thus it is probably September/October, meaning that
    the final extinguishment was to take place in December/January. This
    conflicts with the tradition of ascribing his final extinguishment
    to the full moon of Vesak, in May.

[^351]: The [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} shrine is unknown outside of this
    context. The [Udāna]{lang="sa"} commentary says that it was named
    after the *yakkha* who formerly lived there. Now,
    *[cāpalla]{lang="sa"}* means "fickleness, propensity to tremble" and
    is from the same root as earth-"quake" (*[bhumicāla]{lang="sa"}*;
    *capala* = *pacala* via metathesis). It is no great leap to
    *[cāpāla]{lang="sa"}*. If this is correct, it suggests that the
    shrine was dedicated to an earth spirit who commanded earthquakes; a
    fitting setting for the events to follow.

[^352]: Northern India lies in the shadow of the seismically active
    Alpide Belt, so the occurrence of earthquakes is realistic even if
    the causes are not scientific.

[^353]: For this difficult verse, I generally follow Bhikkhu Bodhi's
    long discussion in *Connected Discourses of the Buddha*, note 255 on
    the [Mahāvagga]{lang="sa"}. \| *Sambhava* means "production,
    creation", and here I think it refers to the prolonging of life
    which the Buddha had just rejected.

[^354]: *[Bhavasaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* ("life force") here is equivalent
    to *[āyusaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}* and *[jīvitasaṅkhāra]{lang="sa"}*.

[^355]: *Attasambhava* ("self-creation") refers back to *sambhava* in
    the first line.

[^356]: So far as it goes, this is a naturalistic explanation. The
    "water element" has the quality of softening, while the "air
    element" is traditionally understood as "movement". Thus in modern
    terms this means, "When underground forces disturb a region of
    instability."

[^357]: The might of ascetics was legendary in ancient India (eg. [MN
    56:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#14.2)). The
    meditation described here might be compared with the "dimensions of
    mastery" below ([DN
    16:3.25.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.25.1)).

[^358]: At [DN
    14:1.17.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.17.7) and [MN
    123:7.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn123/en/sujato#7.6) it is,
    rather, the entire galaxy that trembles, perhaps indicating that the
    enhanced miracle is a later development.

[^359]: There are many accounts of the Buddha's awakening in the suttas,
    but none, so far as I know, that mention an earthquake.

[^360]: See [SN
    56.11:13.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#13.2).

[^361]: This refers to the Buddha's death. The Pali here uses both
    *[nibbāna]{lang="sa"}* and *[parinibbāna]{lang="sa"}*. Sometimes it
    is said that *[nibbāna]{lang="sa"}* is the attainment of
    arahantship, while *[parinibbāna]{lang="sa"}* is the death of an
    arahant, but this distinction is not consistently applied in the
    suttas. \| Regarding *[nibbānadhātuyā]{lang="sa"}* ("the element of
    extinguishment"), in Pali the case is ambiguous. It is sometimes
    translated "by means of" or "through", which assumes the
    instrumental; but the Sanskrit is *[nirvāṇadhātau]{lang="sa"}*,
    which must be locative.

[^362]: As at [AN 8.69](https://suttacentral.net/an8.69/en/sujato). The
    following series of "eight things" seems arbitrarily inserted here
    and breaks the flow of the narrative. They are absent from the
    Sanskrit [Sarvāstivāda]{lang="sa"} text edited by Waldschmidt, which
    goes directly to the conversation where Ānanda realizes that the
    Buddha is going to die.

[^363]: These "assemblies" were formal deliberative meetings, not just
    gatherings. Thus "householders" here does not mean "lay folk" in
    apposition to "ascetics"; rather it means "home owners". Some of
    these assemblies are depicted or alluded to in the
    [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}. At [DN
    6:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn6/en/sujato#1.3), brahmins
    assemble in [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}; while at [DN
    3:1.13.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.13.3),
    [Ambaṭṭha]{lang="sa"} speaks of an assembly of Sakyans, who were
    aristocrats. At [DN
    18:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato#12.1), we get a
    glimpse of the proceedings at a meeting of the gods of the
    thirty-three.

[^364]: There do not appear to be any records of this happening in the
    early texts, although that is perhaps to be expected. It does feel
    out of character for the Buddha, as normally he is very up front.
    The commentary says that this ruse was adopted so the Buddha could
    plant subtle seeds (*[vāsanā]{lang="sa"}*) for the future.

[^365]: These are another way of describing the different experiences of
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*. Also at [AN
    8.65](https://suttacentral.net/an8.65/en/sujato), [AN
    10.29:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.29/en/sujato#6.1), [DN
    33:3.1.142](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#3.1.142), [DN
    34:2.1.160](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.1.160), and
    [MN 77:23.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#23.1).

[^366]: "Perceiving form (*[rūpa]{lang="sa"}*) internally" refers to
    someone developing meditation based on an aspect of their own body,
    such as the breath or the parts of the body. The "forms"
    (*[rūpā]{lang="sa"}*) seen externally are the lights or other
    meditation phenomena that today are usually called *nimitta*. An
    "ugly" form is the mental image that arises in such contemplations
    as the parts of the body. A "beautiful" image arises from practices
    such as mindfulness of breathing.

[^367]: "Not perceiving form internally" refers to meditations such as
    the external elements, or the decaying of another's body.

[^368]: This is the meditation where one contemplates an external color,
    either a prepared disk or a natural phenomena such as the sky or a
    flower, which eventually gives rise to a "counterpart" image. Today
    such meditations are called *[kasiṇa]{lang="sa"}* following the
    Visuddhimagga, but in the early texts *[kasiṇa]{lang="sa"}* means
    "totality" and refers rather to the state of *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}*
    that results.

[^369]: Already encountered at [DN
    15:35.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#35.1).

[^370]: Note that this is the idiom that Ānanda uses when directly
    quoting the Buddha.

[^371]: "Misdeed" is *[dukkaṭaṁ]{lang="sa"}*. This term is familiar as
    the most minor class of offences in the Vinaya. Here we see an
    informal use of the term as something that has been wrongly done,
    rather than a legal violation. It is used in a similar way by
    [Mākassapa]{lang="sa"} at the First Council, who accuses Ānanda of
    several misdeeds. As a legal term, *[dukkaṭa]{lang="sa"}* is late;
    the category of offences is not found in the Vinayas of the
    [Mahāsaṅghika]{lang="sa"} group of schools, which use
    *vinayatikkrama* for a similar idea.

[^372]: The Buddha goes on to list multiple places where he hinted to
    Ānanda, but the only record of such a conversation is at the
    [Cāpāla]{lang="sa"} Shrine.

[^373]: The following group of places are all near
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, and collectively illustrate the variety of
    dwellings and environs enjoyed by the mendicants practicing there.
    \| The Gotama banyan tree shrine is mentioned only here. Gotama is a
    common name, and this shrine does not appear to have any connection
    with the Buddha.

[^374]: A cliff from which bandits were tossed as a means of execution.

[^375]: The Pali tradition says the First Council was held near the
    entrance to this cave ([Dīpavaṁsa]{lang="sa"} 4.19,
    [Mahāvaṁsa]{lang="sa"} 3.19, [Samantapāsādikā]{lang="sa"}
    [Paṭhamamahāsaṅgītikathā]{lang="sa"}). The Vinayas all agree that it
    was at [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, but traditions vary as to the exact
    location.

[^376]: A large open area where Jains did their penances ([MN
    14:15.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn14/en/sujato#15.2)) and the
    Buddha taught occasionally ([SN
    8.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn8.10/en/sujato)), but it is most
    famous as the place the monks Godhika ([SN
    4.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.23/en/sujato)) and Vakkali took
    their lives ([SN
    22.87](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.87/en/sujato)).

[^377]: Mentioned several times in the suttas as a pleasant place to
    meditate, it is notable as the site of the conversion of the
    Buddha's chief layman disciple [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"} ([SN
    10.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.8/en/sujato)). But the most
    famous event there was when the Buddha moderated the monk
    [Soṇa]{lang="sa"}'s excessive striving ([AN
    6.55](https://suttacentral.net/an6.55/en/sujato)).

[^378]: The hot springs near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} were a popular place
    for monks to bathe, so much so that they prompted a rule ensuring
    that the monks did not monopolize the springs ([Bu Pc
    57](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc57/en/sujato)). They are
    still in use and just as popular as ever.

[^379]: A personal gift of King [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}, this was the
    first permanent monastery offered to the Buddha and his
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ([Kd
    1:22.17.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#22.17.3)).

[^380]: [Mahākappina]{lang="sa"} stayed here ([Kd
    1:5.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#5.3.1)), and
    the Buddha rested there when his foot was first injured, apparently
    by Devadatta, before [Jīvaka]{lang="sa"} offered his mango grove
    ([SN 1.38](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.38/en/sujato), [SN
    4.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.13/en/sujato)).

[^381]: The following group of places are all in the Vajjian country
    near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. Whereas the varied sites around
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} reflect the rugged terrain there, at
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} all the sites are tree-shrines, as the
    surrounding land is flat. [DN
    24:1.11.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#1.11.5) indicates
    where they lay relative to [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}; the Udena shrine was
    to the east, and the next three to the south, west, and north
    respectively. \| *Udena* is an epithet of the "arising" sun (Rig
    Veda 1.48.7), although here it may have the sense "prosperity".

[^382]: Named after the local *yakkha*, to whom offerings would have
    been made. It could get cold enough to snow, prompting the Buddha to
    lay down a rule permitting three robes ([Kd
    1:13.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#13.2.1)). A
    short but galaxy-shaking discourse was once taught there ([AN
    3.125:0.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.125/en/sujato#0.3)).

[^383]: The Pali has *amba* ("mango") and *ambaka* ("maiden") as
    variants. The commentary supports the latter, saying it was named
    for seven legendary princesses of Varanasi in the time of Buddha
    Kassapa, all of whom went on to become great disciples of our
    Buddha. I made this translation on the small island of Qimei off the
    south coast of Taiwan, where there is a shrine to the "seven
    maidens" who gave the island its name. Stories of "seven maidens"
    are widespread in myth and folklore all over the world, including
    Aboriginal Dreamtime stories. The archetype descends from the
    constellation known in English as Pleiades and in Sanskrit as
    [Kṛttikā]{lang="sa"}. Since there are six main visible stars in the
    cluster today, the stories often tell of how the youngest of the
    seven sisters was lost. In the Buddhist telling this is
    [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, the only sister not to become an arahant in
    this life.

[^384]: This was, obviously, a fertility shrine.

[^385]: Previously mentioned as the place where the seven principles of
    non-decline were taught to the Licchavis. The meaning of
    [Sārandada]{lang="sa"} is obscure and variants profligate, but it
    might be derived from the Munda word *sara*, "funeral pyre". The
    commentary says it was taken over from an old shrine to a *yakkha*
    of that name.

[^386]: "Take back" is *[paccāvamissati]{lang="sa"}*, which has several
    variants. It occurs in [Ja
    69](https://suttacentral.net/ja69/en/sujato) and [Ja
    509](https://suttacentral.net/ja509/en/sujato), where it is the
    opposite of *vamati*, to "expel, vomit".

[^387]: This was the major [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} residence near
    [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. The Great Wood, according to the commentary,
    stretched as far as the Himalayas. Later tradition says that a town
    should have three woods: a "great wood" for wilderness
    (*[mahāvana]{lang="sa"}*); a "prosperity wood" for resources
    (*sirivana*); and an "ascetic wood" for spiritual practice
    (*tapovana*).

[^388]: Compare the earlier request to gather all the mendicants around
    [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    16:1.6.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#1.6.2)).

[^389]: Memorization was considered an essential basis for learning. In
    similar passages, we also find the injunction to "recite" the
    teachings, thus authorizing the recitation of the Buddha's teachings
    after his death, which was later formalized in the Councils
    (*[saṅgīti]{lang="sa"}*).

[^390]: These are the sets of practices later called the 37
    *[bodhiyapakkhiyā]{lang="sa"} [dhammā]{lang="sa"}*, the "wings to
    awakening". Here they are presented as an essential summary of the
    Buddha's teachings. They form the backbone of the final book of the
    [Saṁyuttanikāya]{lang="sa"}, the Maggavagga (or
    [Mahāvagga]{lang="sa"}). It is likely that the Buddha was referring
    to the earliest recension of this text. They are found as a summary
    of the Buddha's teachings at [DN
    29:17.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#17.3), [MN
    103:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn103/en/sujato#3.2), [MN
    104:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#5.3), and [AN
    8.19:17.2](https://suttacentral.net/an8.19/en/sujato#17.2) = [Ud
    5.5:25.2](https://suttacentral.net/ud5.5/en/sujato#25.2).

[^391]: This is perhaps the briefest summary possible of the Buddha's
    teaching. The world as it is, and all the beings in it, are created
    and sustained through conditions. Since the conditions that sustain
    them are finite, the conditioned phenomena are also finite and must
    come to an end. Reflecting on this gives rise to gratitude for the
    life we have and the opportunities it grants us, and determination
    to live and practice dedicated to the realization of the
    unconditioned, Nibbana.

[^392]: "Ripe old age" is *paripakko vayo*.

[^393]: "Well-settled thoughts" is *[susamāhitasaṅkappā]{lang="sa"}*.
    Compare *[asamāhitasaṅkappo]{lang="sa"}* at [AN
    4.22:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.22/en/sujato#5.3).

[^394]: *[Nāgāpalokitaṁ]{lang="sa"}* is the "elephant look". There is a
    similar Sanskrit term *[siṁhāvalokana]{lang="sa"}*, the "lion look",
    said to be the slow glance back that a lion makes as he leaves his
    kill. There is a nuance in meaning here, because while *apalokana*
    literally means to "look back", it is used in the sense to "take
    leave" before setting out on a journey.

[^395]: *[Bhaṇḍagāma]{lang="sa"}*, where *[bhaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* means
    "wares"; it must have been a trading post. It seems the villages in
    this passage were named after their chief economic activity, so I
    translate them to highlight this pragmatic system.

[^396]: This four also found at [AN
    4.1:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.1/en/sujato#2.3) and [AN
    7.66:14.4](https://suttacentral.net/an7.66/en/sujato#14.4).

[^397]: Here the text refers to the Buddha in the third person; compare
    the previous set of verses in first person. Although the text states
    that these verses were spoken by the Buddha, it is possible that, as
    with many similar cases especially in the
    [Aṅguttaranikāya]{lang="sa"}, the verses were added by redactors.

[^398]: Note the use of "quenched" (*parinibbuto*) here while the Buddha
    is still alive.

[^399]: *[Hatthigāma]{lang="sa"}*, probably a village which specialized
    in training elephants.

[^400]: *[Ambagāma]{lang="sa"}*.

[^401]: *[Jambugāma]{lang="sa"}*.

[^402]: Departing from the economic naming scheme, here *bhoga* does not
    mean "wealth". Rather, the Bhogas were one of the clans of the Vajji
    Federation.

[^403]: "Great references" is *[mahāpadesa]{lang="sa"}*; also at [AN
    4.180](https://suttacentral.net/an4.180/en/sujato). A different set
    of four *[mahāpadesas]{lang="sa"}* are [Kd
    1:40.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#40.1.1),
    which provide criteria by which mendicants may judge what is and is
    not allowable.

[^404]: The phrase used in the suttas when reporting a teaching heard
    directly from the Buddha, eg. [SN
    55.52:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.52/en/sujato#5.1), [SN
    22.90:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.90/en/sujato#9.1), [MN
    47:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn47/en/sujato#10.7), etc.

[^405]: *Dhamma*, *vinaya*, and *[satthusāsana]{lang="sa"}* are used in
    the suttas in the general sense of the entirety of the Buddha's
    teachings. In his advice to [Mahāpajāpatī]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    8.53](https://suttacentral.net/an8.53/en/sujato)) and
    [Upāli]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    7.83](https://suttacentral.net/an7.83/en/sujato)), they are said to
    be whatever conforms with letting go. A stream-enterer who is a lay
    person is grounded in them ([AN
    6.16:7.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.16/en/sujato#7.2)). They are
    more frequent in the Vinaya, being used as a general qualifier of a
    legitimate legal procedure ([Bu Pc
    63:2.1.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc63/en/sujato#2.1.8)).
    Due to this, the fact that there are three items, and the fact that
    *dhamma* and *sutta* are different words, we should not take
    *dhamma* and *vinaya* here as equivalent to *sutta* and *vinaya*
    below. Rather, they are a general claim to authenticity and do not
    specify particular texts.

[^406]: As at [MN
    112:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn112/en/sujato#3.1), [DN
    29:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#18.4), and [AN
    4.180:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/an4.180/en/sujato#2.5).

[^407]: It is tempting to assume that *sutta* here means the
    [Suttapiṭaka]{lang="sa"} and *vinaya* means the
    [Vinayapiṭaka]{lang="sa"}, or at least an earlier version of these
    texts; but this is not supported by tradition. The late canonical
    Netti explains *sutta* as "the four noble truths" and *vinaya* as
    "the removal of greed, hate, and delusion" ([Ne
    6](https://suttacentral.net/ne6/en/sujato)). The commentaries
    discuss many interpretations; ultimately they agree with the Netti
    for *vinaya*, but say *sutta* means the entire
    [Tipiṭaka]{lang="sa"}. I think the Netti is correct: teachings
    should "fit in" with the four noble truths (like other footprints
    fit in to an elephant's footprint, [MN
    28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato)), and they should "be
    exhibited" in that the results of practice should be apparent
    (*[sandiṭṭhika]{lang="sa"}*). \| "Memorize"
    (*[uggahetvā]{lang="sa"}*), because in an oral tradition a text is
    not learned until it is known by heart; such claims must be taken
    seriously. \| "Fit into" is *[osāreti]{lang="sa"}* or
    *[otāreti]{lang="sa"}* per [AN
    4.180](https://suttacentral.net/an4.180/en/sujato); the two words
    have a similar meaning, "to flow down into".

[^408]: The text has *ca* ("and") rather than *[vā]{lang="sa"}* ("or"),
    which would be expected if they were to be found in one or other
    textual collection. This is urging that any teaching fits in with
    the fundamental principles of the four noble truths, and is
    effective in removing defilements.

[^409]: The Pali text appears to say that one should remember the
    *[mahāpadesa]{lang="sa"}*, whereas the Sanskrit clearly says one
    should remember the passage (*[ayaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    dharmo'[yaṁ]{lang="sa"} vinaya [idaṁ]{lang="sa"} [śāstuḥ]{lang="sa"}
    [śāsanam]{lang="sa"} iti [viditvā]{lang="sa"}
    [dhārayitavyāḥ]{lang="sa"}*). It seems as if this pattern should
    underlie the Pali too, for if the passage is false, one "should
    reject it" (*[chaḍḍeyyātha]{lang="sa"}*). In the case of a correct
    passage we should expect a parallel injunction that one "should
    remember it" (*[dhāreyyātha]{lang="sa"}*). But if this applies to
    the *[mahāpadesa]{lang="sa"}* there is no such injunction. Thus it
    seems as if the Sanskrit is correct here and the Pali corrupt. I
    restore it by reversing the order of the phrases.

[^410]: Each of the four references is a little less solid than the
    previous. Here one hasn't heard from the Buddha, but from the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. The fact that one hears it from the
    [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} implies a kind of formal group recitation such
    as a *[saṅgīti]{lang="sa"}* or "council".

[^411]: Now one learns not from a unified [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, but from
    several learned elders. This is a stock description of learned
    mendicants (eg. [AN
    3.20:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/an3.20/en/sujato#6.2)). \|
    "Inheritors of the heritage" is *[āgatāgamā]{lang="sa"}*, where
    *[āgama]{lang="sa"}* means "what has come down", namely the
    scriptural heritage. *Āgama* is a synonym for *[nikāya]{lang="sa"}*
    in the sense of "collection of scripture". \| The "outlines"
    (*[mātikā]{lang="sa"}*, literally "matrix") are the summary outlines
    of topics that served as seeds for the development of Abhidhamma.
    [DN 16:3.50.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.50.5)
    features one of the earliest of such lists, the 37 path factors that
    the Buddha "taught from his own direct knowledge". These serve as
    outline for the section on the path in the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"},
    from where they were adopted in various Abhidhamma texts such as the
    [Vibhaṅga]{lang="sa"}.

[^412]: Finally the testimony of a single mendicant, which is the
    weakest of all. Nonetheless, the procedure is the same.

[^413]: The parallel at [AN
    4.180:9.11](https://suttacentral.net/an4.180/en/sujato#9.11) omits
    *[dhāreyyāthā]{lang="sa"}*, which I take to be the correct reading.
    See my note on *[dhāreyyāthā]{lang="sa"}* at [DN
    16:4.8.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.8.13).

[^414]: [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}, a town of the Mallas, has more significance
    for this narrative than appears at first sight. It was, according to
    Buddhist texts, the place where [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} had recently
    died, plunging the Jains into chaos. (The Jains, however, say this
    was another [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}, east of [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"}.)
    [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} became associated with especially ascetic monks:
    thirty [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} monks became awakened on hearing a
    particularly strong discourse ([SN
    15.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.13/en/sujato));
    [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} heard the news of the Buddha's passing at
    [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}; and monks from [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} allied with
    monks of "Avanti and the south" arguing for strict Vinaya in the
    Second Council ([Kd
    1:1.7.11](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.7.11)).

[^415]: This passage also at [Ud
    8.5](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.5/en/sujato).

[^416]: Cunda was apparently a metal-worker, which was an advanced form
    of technological craftsmanship.

[^417]: This is, according to the commentary, preserved as the other
    discourse taught to Cunda, which deals with proper asceticism ([Snp
    1.5](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.5/en/sujato)).

[^418]: The exact meaning of *[sūkaramaddava]{lang="sa"}* is unclear.
    *[Sūkara]{lang="sa"}* is "pig", but some Chinese translations
    suggest the sense "mushroom"; and it is true that there are several
    names of plants or plant dishes that begin with
    *[sūkara]{lang="sa"}* or other animals. At [Dhp
    377](https://suttacentral.net/dhp377/en/sujato), flowers are
    described as *maddava*, meaning "overripe, withering on the vine".
    It is a common practice to allow meat to sit for a while to become
    tender and "high" for extra flavor when cooked. But this can lead to
    a proliferation of dangerous bacteria unless properly cooked, and
    such seems to have been the case here. In any case, this disputed
    term is marginal in a consideration of meat-eating in early
    Buddhism, which is discussed more fully elsewhere.

[^419]: If the Buddha knew the meal was dangerous, why ask to be served
    it? This is even more striking in light of the fact that it is a
    Vinaya offence to request fine food, including meat, and nowhere
    else is such a request recorded ([Bu Pc
    39:2.10.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc39/en/sujato#2.10.1)).
    Such narrative ambiguities serve to escalate a sense of wonder.

[^420]: The Buddha's illness is sometimes diagnosed as mesenteric
    infarction. The Buddha's body rejects the world of conditioned
    existence entirely.

[^421]: The commentary says that these verses were added by the elders
    at the Council.

[^422]: The *[saṅghāṭi]{lang="sa"}* ("outer robe" or "cloak") is
    double-layered, and served both for warmth and as bedding. The
    Buddha has not recovered fully from his illness.

[^423]: The Buddha was an exemplary patient. He did not complain, but
    made his needs known clearly to his carer.

[^424]: It would seem that, since the Buddha was enduring his illness
    without complaint and with dignity, Ānanda did not fully realize how
    weak he has become.

[^425]: The bowl (*patta*) was used both for eating and drinking.

[^426]: Pukkusa is not elsewhere mentioned. The reference to
    [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"} recalls the narrative of the
    bodhisatta's practices before awakening. There are several details
    that indicate the stories of the first part and the last part of the
    Buddha's life were unified by such callbacks. We meet the Malla clan
    later on.

[^427]: *[Niśraya]{lang="sa"}* in the sense of "near" occurs at
    [Śatapathabrāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 3.1.2.17.

[^428]: In deep meditation the senses cease to function.

[^429]: As were [Mahāpajāpatī]{lang="sa"}'s limbs ([AN
    8.51](https://suttacentral.net/an8.51/en/sujato)).

[^430]: A nearby town where the Buddha had stayed previously ([Kd
    1:37.4.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#37.4.2)).

[^431]: *[Siṅgīvaṇṇa]{lang="sa"}*, or else *[siṅgīsuvaṇṇa]{lang="sa"}*
    ([AN 3.70:38.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.70/en/sujato#38.3)), is
    gold from a mountain peak (*[siṅgī]{lang="sa"}*).
    [Kauṭilya]{lang="sa"} mentions a form of gold that is
    *[śṛṅgaśūktija]{lang="sa"}*, "occurring on mount [Śūkti]{lang="sa"}"
    ([Arthaśāstra]{lang="sa"} 2.13.3). The commentary to that passage
    says it had the color of red arsenic, so it would have been a rose
    gold color.

[^432]: Closing the narrative circle with the story of awakening.

[^433]: The commentary says this verse was added by the senior monks at
    the Council.

[^434]: The monk Cundaka makes an abrupt appearance here; this is the
    only mention of this name. The commentary to this passage calls him
    *cunda*, while the gloss to the parallel passage at [Ud
    8.5:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.5/en/sujato#14.3) has
    *cundaka* throughout. The diminutive ending *-ka* is perhaps meant
    to differentiate him from the smith Cunda. There are various Cundas
    whose connection is unclear. [Mahācunda]{lang="sa"} was one of the
    great disciples ([MN
    118:](https://suttacentral.net/mn118/en/sujato), [AN
    6.17](https://suttacentral.net/an6.17/en/sujato), [MN
    8](https://suttacentral.net/mn8/en/sujato)), who later brought the
    Dhamma to the land of the [Cetīs]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    6.46](https://suttacentral.net/an6.46/en/sujato), [AN
    10.24](https://suttacentral.net/an10.24/en/sujato)). He once stayed
    with Channa and [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} ([MN
    144:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn144/en/sujato#4.1), [SN
    35.87:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.87/en/sujato#1.2)); the
    commentaries say he was in fact [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s younger
    brother. They also identify him with the "novice Cunda" who reported
    the deaths of [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} ([SN
    47.13:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.13/en/sujato#1.3)) and
    [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    29:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#2.1), [MN
    104:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#3.1)), explaining
    that the title "novice" was a nickname that persisted from the time
    he ordained as a young novice. It is unclear whether the
    commentaries take the Cundaka of this passage to be the same person,
    but he is here performing a similar role as carer adjacent to the
    Buddha's death. Later there appears a [Cūḷacunda]{lang="sa"} ([Tha
    Ap 52:13.3](https://suttacentral.net/tha-ap52/en/sujato#13.3)). Thus
    there may have been one person known by different names, or several
    people whose stories have become conflated.

[^435]: These verses were also added at the Council according to the
    commentary.

[^436]: Adopt PTS and BJT reading *[satthā]{lang="sa"}
    [pavattā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^437]: The text addresses Cunda with the respectful
    *[āvuso]{lang="sa"}*.

[^438]: Again, the narrative circle.

[^439]: The text uses *[āyasmā]{lang="sa"}* here for Cunda, as does the
    Sanskrit, whereas it is normally reserved for mendicants (see below,
    [DN 16:6.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.2.1)).

[^440]: This became a point of discussion in later Buddhism: can it be
    that the merit of a gift grows after it is given?

[^441]: Known today as Kushinagar, it is a popular site for pilgrims,
    with many ancient stupas, Buddha images, and a peaceful park for
    meditation.

[^442]: Normally when the Buddha lies down, his mind is focused on
    getting up. But now he knows that he will not rise again.

[^443]: Sal trees blossom in April/May. This detail agrees with the
    Buddha's final extinguishment in December/January, rather than in
    May (Vesak) as is currently celebrated (see note to [DN
    16:3.9.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.9.3)).

[^444]: This calls back to the description of the fourfold assembly in
    the [Māra]{lang="sa"} section above ([DN
    16:3.7.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.7.4)).

[^445]: This kind of narrative elevation is characteristic of the
    Buddha's teaching. He did not try to deny or eliminate any belief in
    the miraculous, or in the power of devotion, but rather to show that
    such things were of limited worth compared with practice.

[^446]: Like Cundaka above, [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} shares the duties of an
    attendant with Ānanda; at [DN
    29:41.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#41.1) he is also
    fanning the Buddha. At [AN
    5.166](https://suttacentral.net/an5.166/en/sujato), Ānanda goes to
    [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} for support when he feels he has disappointed
    the Buddha.

[^447]: In [SN 7.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn7.13/en/sujato)
    [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} fetched hot water and molasses for the Buddha,
    an event he remembered in his own verses at [Thag
    2.33](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.33/en/sujato).

[^448]: For this usage of *[phuṭo]{lang="sa"}*, see [AN
    3.56:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56/en/sujato#1.3).

[^449]: Elsewhere, *[pathavīsaññī]{lang="sa"}* refers to those who
    develop a form of meditation where they are "percipient of earth"
    ([AN 10.6:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an10.6/en/sujato#1.2)).
    Here, however, it simply means those deities who are aware of events
    on the ground. \| Read *[chinnaṁpādaṁ]{lang="sa"} viya papatanti*.

[^450]: The Buddha as "eye" evokes the common (eg. Rig Veda 1.164.14,
    5.40.8, 5.59.5, 10.10.9) Vedic image of the Sun as the "eye of all"
    (*[viśvacakṣāḥ]{lang="sa"}*, 7.63.1), the "eye" for "eyes to see"
    (10.158.4), moving as an unaging wheel through the sky (1.164.14).
    See [Snp 3.9:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#11.1) =
    [MN 98:7.23](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#7.23). \| Pali
    has *[cakkhuṁ]{lang="sa"} loke* ("eye in the world"), Sanskrit has
    *[cakṣur]{lang="sa"} lokasya* ("eye of the world").

[^451]: These two reactions---grief and equanimity---are depicted often
    in Buddhist art and narrative. They stimulated the two poles of
    development of the Buddhist community. The devotional tradition,
    feeling the need for an emotional connection with the Teacher,
    developed art, story, and doctrines to, as it were, keep him alive,
    resulting in the [Jātakas]{lang="sa"} and the Bodhisattva doctrine.
    A cooler, rational tradition developed a comprehensive system
    analyzing the impermanence of "conditions", leading to the
    Abhidhamma.

[^452]: As for example at [MN
    24:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn24/en/sujato#2.1).

[^453]: *[Manobhāvanīya]{lang="sa"}* is explained in the commentaries as
    "those who, when seen, cause the mind to grow in what is skillful."

[^454]: These four sites are the primary destinations of modern Buddhist
    pilgrims in India. \| *[Saṁvejanīya]{lang="sa"}* is "stirring,
    provoking inspiration or urgency" such as when seeing an
    astonishing, disturbing, or amazing sight.

[^455]: [Lumbinī]{lang="sa"} in modern Nepal, which today is a
    well-maintained and quiet place for devotion and meditation. The
    site is marked with an Ashokan pillar dated perhaps 150 years after
    this time. On the pillar is inscribed in [Brahmī]{lang="sa"}
    characters *hida [bhagavaṁ]{lang="sa"} [jāte]{lang="sa"} ti*, which
    is a direct quote in [Māgadhī]{lang="sa"} of the Pali phrase here,
    *idha [tathāgato]{lang="sa"} [jāto]{lang="sa"} ti*.
    (*[Tathāgata]{lang="sa"}* "realized one" is how the Buddha referred
    to himself, while *[bhagavā]{lang="sa"}* "blessed one" is how his
    followers referred to him.) This is the oldest direct quote from the
    early canon preserved in the archaeological record.

[^456]: Bodhgaya in modern Bihar, which is called [Uruvelā]{lang="sa"}
    in the Pali texts. It is a bustling center for pilgrims from all
    over the Buddhist world, at the center of which is the great stupa
    next to the Bodhi tree.

[^457]: Isipatana is modern Sarnath, in the northern part of Varanasi on
    the Ganges. In the temple next to the park, the first sermon is
    recited every night. \| Note the passive voice, whereas the parallel
    at [AN 4.118](https://suttacentral.net/an4.118/en/sujato) is active.

[^458]: The phrase *[nibbānadhātuyā]{lang="sa"} parinibbuto*, "fully
    quenched in the element of extinguishment" shows how the Pali uses
    two roots simultaneously for Nibbana. The better-known term,
    *[nibbāna]{lang="sa"}* (Sanskrit *[nirvāṇa]{lang="sa"}*), is from
    the root *[vā]{lang="sa"}* ("to blow"), with the basic sense of
    going out through being deprived of air. The past participle form
    *nibbuta* (Sanskrit *[nirvṛta]{lang="sa"}*), from the root *var*
    ("to check or restrain"), has the basic sense of freedom from
    obstacles and constrictions. Generally, the Pali treats *nibbuta* as
    the past participle form of *[nibbāna]{lang="sa"}*, and for the most
    part the difference is purely verbal. Yet I believe the ambiguity is
    deliberate, as each captures a slightly different nuance of Nibbana.
    "Quenched" means both to go out like a flame and to be satisfied
    like a thirst. This positive feel appears in Sanskrit passages using
    *[nirvṛta]{lang="sa"}*, such as [Manusmṛti]{lang="sa"} 1.54, where
    it describes the blissful absorption of all beings into the great
    divinity. By using "extinguishment" for *[nibbāna]{lang="sa"}* and
    "quenched" for *nibbuta* I hope to express this subtle distinction,
    or at least to alert the reader that it exists.

[^459]: This passage is absent from the Sanskrit parallel and it is
    probably a late interpolation. Ānanda was handsome, and many stories
    of his encounters with women are preserved, for example at [Bu Pc
    41:1.1.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc41/en/sujato#1.1.5).

[^460]: As it stands, this appears to contradict [MN
    152:2.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn152/en/sujato#2.10), where the
    Buddha ridicules the idea that sense restraint implies not seeing.
    The commentary, however, explains it as not looking at a woman who
    is standing in the doorway of a monk's hut, so as not to give rise
    to lust. Thus it restricts this apparently general rule to an
    unusually intimate encounter.

[^461]: The verb changes from *[paṭipajjāma]{lang="sa"}* (first person
    plural) to *[paṭipajjitabbaṁ]{lang="sa"}* (future passive
    participle), a shift that mirrors the following passage regarding
    the funeral proceedings. There, the shift to future passive
    participle indicates that the subject is the lay folk who carry out
    the funeral, whereas here that does not apply. This suggests that
    this passage has been derived from that later passage.

[^462]: The commentary refers to [AN
    5.55:6.5](https://suttacentral.net/an5.55/en/sujato#6.5), which
    speaks of chatting alone in private with a woman, a circumstance
    also dealt with in [Bu Pc
    45](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc45/en/sujato).

[^463]: Ānanda does not hesitate to let the Buddha know he has no
    intention of following his advice.

[^464]: The commentary says, quoting [SN
    35.127:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.127/en/sujato#1.6), that
    when a woman has sincere motivations, one should speak while
    thinking of them as a mother, a sister, or a daughter.

[^465]: "Corpse" is *[sarīra]{lang="sa"}*.

[^466]: For *[abyāvaṭā]{lang="sa"}* ("don't get involved"), compare
    *[samaṇena]{lang="sa"} [bhavitabbaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [abyāvaṭena]{lang="sa"}* ("a monastic shouldn't get involved" (in
    domestic matters)) at [Bu Ss
    5:1.3.34](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss5/en/sujato#1.3.34).

[^467]: Read *sadatthe* ("own goal") rather than *[sāratthe]{lang="sa"}*
    ("essential goal").

[^468]: An iron case was also used for Queen [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"}'s body
    at [AN 5.50:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/an5.50/en/sujato#1.6). The
    second iron case does not "enclose" the first; rather it "crooks"
    (*[paṭikujjati]{lang="sa"}*) like a lid to "close it up".

[^469]: This is a rare mention of the *[thūpa]{lang="sa"}* ("sepulchral
    momunent") that became a major feature of the Buddhist landscape.
    Buddhist monuments were round in shape, which was apparently a
    characteristic of the lands around Magadha.
    [Śatapathabrāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 13.8.1.5 says that the correct form
    of such a monument was square, and that round monuments were built
    by godless "easterners".

[^470]: Here the Buddha is said to be explicitly instructing his
    followers to adopt the building of monuments from the local customs.

[^471]: "Independent Buddhas" are sages who discover the Dhamma and are
    awakened independently, but who do not themselves go on to found a
    dispensation or establish a monastic order. Text has
    *paccekasambuddho* rather than the usual *paccekabuddho*.

[^472]: This refers to the "eight individuals" who make up the
    "[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of disciples", namely those who have achieved
    the four stages of awakening and those on the path.

[^473]: In contrast with [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}.

[^474]: Like Queen [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"}, wife of
    [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}, at [DN
    17:2.8.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.8.7) and [DN
    17:2.12.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.12.1). \|
    *[Kapisīsa]{lang="sa"}* is door-jamb, not lintel. \| For
    *[vihāra]{lang="sa"}* ("building") the commentary has "pavilion"
    (*[maṇḍalamāla]{lang="sa"}*), which may have been a temporary
    construction for the occasion (compare [MN
    92:4.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn92/en/sujato#4.6)).

[^475]: At this point Ānanda was a stream-enterer.

[^476]: When admonishing Ānanda, the Buddha first gently but firmly
    restrains him, then gives words of support and encouragement.

[^477]: The phrase "undivided and limitless" (*advayena
    [appamāṇena]{lang="sa"}*) normally describes *[kasiṇa]{lang="sa"}*
    meditation ([AN
    10.25:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an10.25/en/sujato#1.3)); here it
    is also found in the Sanskrit: *[ānanda]{lang="sa"}
    [maitreṇa]{lang="sa"} [kāyakarmaṇā]{lang="sa"} hitena
    [sukhenādvayenāpramāṇena]{lang="sa"}*.

[^478]: On the eve of the First Council---in about six months
    time---Ānanda devoted himself to meditation and achieved
    arahantship.

[^479]: The same is said regarding the chief disciples
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"} at [SN
    47.14:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.14/en/sujato#2.4) and
    regarding assemblies of deities at [DN
    20:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#4.3).

[^480]: *Tittha*, literally "ford", is a path to salvation, used as a
    term for a non-Buddhist "religion". *Titthakara* is a "religious
    founder" (literally "ford-maker"); *titthiya* is a "monastic of
    (another) religion" (for example at [Bu NP
    22:1.2.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-np22/en/sujato#1.2.5));
    *[titthiyasāvaka]{lang="sa"}* is a "disciple of a monastic of
    (another) religion".

[^481]: As at [AN
    4.130:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an4.130/en/sujato#6.4). Ānanda
    was in awe of the "incredible and amazing" qualities of the Buddha,
    and spoke of them often. Here, when Ānanda is at his most
    vulnerable, the Buddha turns the teaching around, pointing out that
    Ānanda is incredible and amazing too.

[^482]: This anticipates the story to follow.

[^483]: [Campā]{lang="sa"}, [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"},
    [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}, and [Kosambī]{lang="sa"} were the capitals of
    [Aṅga]{lang="sa"}, Magadha, Kosala, and Vaccha respectively.
    [Sāketa]{lang="sa"} was the former capital of Kosala. Varanasi was
    formerly the capital of [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}, but at this time was
    contested by Kosala and Magadha, and had recently been won from
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} ([SN
    3.14](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.14/en/sujato), [SN
    3.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.15/en/sujato)).

[^484]: This story is also found in [DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato). It seems that the Pali
    tradition extracted the story and greatly expanded it in an
    independent long discourse, whereas the Sanskrit tradition kept it
    at a more moderate length within the
    [Mahāparinirvāṇasūtra]{lang="sa"} itself.

[^485]: [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} features in the [Kusajātaka]{lang="sa"}
    ([Ja 531](https://suttacentral.net/ja531/en/sujato)), where the ugly
    but wise prince Kusa, son of the legendary [Okkāka]{lang="sa"}, wins
    the hand of the radiant [Pabhāvatī]{lang="sa"}. The
    [Rāmāyaṇa]{lang="sa"} also tells the story of a Kusa, son of
    [Rāma]{lang="sa"}, who ruled the city of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"},
    although this city was located far to the south in the Vindhya
    ranges. Both stories are united by the detail that *kusa* grass, a
    prominent feature of Vedic ritual, ensured the kingly lineage.

[^486]: A "league" (*yojana*) is usually estimated at between seven and
    twelve kilometers. By way of comparison, even at its greatest extent
    under Ashoka, [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"} was less than a league per
    side, so the dimensions of [Kusāvatī]{lang="sa"} here are strictly
    legendary.

[^487]: According to [DN 32](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato),
    [Āḷakamandā]{lang="sa"} was one of the many cities of Kuvera in
    Uttarakuru.

[^488]: [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} is a Vedic priestly clan. The Mallas
    adopted the name of their priest's lineage, which was the normal
    custom for initiated *khattiyas*. Other examples in the Pali are
    Saccaka who is called Aggivessana ([MN
    35:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#4.2)), and the
    Buddha and his family who are called Gotama.

[^489]: *Attadutiyo* "with self as second" is also at [MN
    146:4.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn146/en/sujato#4.6) where Nandaka
    visits the nuns. Sanskrit has *[bhikṣuṇā]{lang="sa"}
    [paścācchramaṇena]{lang="sa"}* ("with a mendicant as accompanying
    ascetic"). It was apparently evening (the "wrong time",
    *[vikāla]{lang="sa"}*), when it is inappropriate for a monk to be
    wandering the town alone.

[^490]: Evidently the Mallas, like the Vajjis, met frequently.

[^491]: This is the second Subhadda we have met in this discourse, the
    first being a deceased devotee of [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    16:2.6.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#2.6.13)). The
    corrupt monk who, after the Buddha's death, urges the rejection of
    the Vinaya rules is another person of the same name ([DN
    16:6.20.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.20.1)). The
    [Mahāsudassanasutta]{lang="sa"} also features a Queen
    [Subhaddā]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    17:2.5.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.5.9)).

[^492]: While some such as [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} the [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}
    ([MN 14:17.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn14/en/sujato#17.2)) and
    [Pūraṇa]{lang="sa"} Kassapa ([AN
    9.38:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.38/en/sujato#2.1)) claimed to
    have direct knowledge, others such as Ajita Kesakambala denied that
    such knowledge was possible ([DN
    2:23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#23.2)).

[^493]: The Buddha responded the same way when asked this question by
    the brahmin [Piṅgalakoccha]{lang="sa"} ([MN
    30:2.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn30/en/sujato#2.6)), and to a
    similar question at [AN
    9.38:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/an9.38/en/sujato#3.2).

[^494]: The four ascetics are defined at [AN
    4.241:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an4.241/en/sujato#1.1) as those
    on the four paths.

[^495]: While many aspects of the eightfold path are shared with others,
    some details may be missing (such as not-self or
    [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}), while others are added (such as the belief in
    the efficacy of rituals, an eternal soul, or a creator god).

[^496]: The Buddha points to the mendicants who have gathered there.

[^497]: This is the only place in the early texts where the Buddha
    identifies his age when going forth.

[^498]: Detailed in such suttas as [MN
    36](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato).

[^499]: This verse appears to be corrupt. The sense can be restored
    through two extra lines in the Sanskrit: "Ethics, immersion,
    conduct, and knowledge, and unification of mind have been developed
    by me, teacher of the references for the noble teaching." \| For
    *[padesavattī]{lang="sa"}*, the Sanskrit has
    *[pradeśavaktā]{lang="sa"}*, where *[vaktā]{lang="sa"}* means
    "speaker" and *[pradeśa]{lang="sa"}* has the sense "pointing out". I
    think it means, "I am the one who taught the four great references
    (*[mahāpadesa]{lang="sa"}*)".

[^500]: The commentary says this line was added at the Council.

[^501]: This is similar to the idea of the Four Great references, and
    sets the scene for the First Council at which the teachings were
    recited. \| *[Paññatto]{lang="sa"}* here means "pointed out" rather
    than "laid down", as can be seen from [DN
    9:33.21](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#33.21), where the
    same phrase refers to the four noble truths.

[^502]: *Āvuso* is from the root *[āyu]{lang="sa"}* ("age") and thus has
    a respectful sense and does not mean "friend" as it is often
    translated. Like *bhante*, it is an indeclinable vocative of address
    that may be used with or without the name (see eg. [MN
    5:31.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn5/en/sujato#31.2)).

[^503]: I render *bhante* as "sir" when it stands alone and "honorable"
    when it prefixes a name. \| Unlike *bhante*, *[āyasmā]{lang="sa"}*
    ("venerable") is declinable, so it is used in parts of speech other
    than direct address. It is from the same root as
    *[āvuso]{lang="sa"}* but with a slightly more respectful tone,
    perhaps because it sounds more Sanskritic.

[^504]: These are not defined here, and the senior monks at the First
    Council were unable to agree on them ([Kd
    21:1.9.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd21/en/sujato#1.9.3)).
    Nonetheless, the Pali Vinaya consistently labels the
    [Pācittiya]{lang="sa"} rules as "lesser" (*khuddaka*; [Bu Pc
    92:2.2.22](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc92/en/sujato#2.2.22),
    [Bi Pc
    96:2.2.22](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pc96/en/sujato#2.2.22),
    [Pvr
    1.1:219.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-pvr1.1/en/sujato#219.3)),
    which would make the [Pātidesanīyas]{lang="sa"} "minor"
    (*anukhuddaka*). The Sekhiya rules are also "minor", but they were
    not at this point reckoned among the training rules for recitation.

[^505]: "Divine punishment" is *[brahmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}*. Channa
    features often in the Vinaya as a monk who refuses correction and
    acts disrespectfully. The Sangha had already imposed an act of
    "ejection" (*[ukkhepanīyakamma]{lang="sa"}*) on him due to his
    persistent bad behavior, but that was still not enough ([Kd
    1:25.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#25.1.1)).
    The *[brahmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* was imposed at the First Council ([Kd
    1:1.12.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.12.1)),
    upon which Channa finally saw the error of his ways.
    *[Brahmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* is encountered in a different sense at
    [DN 3:1.23.21](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.23.21).

[^506]: *Vattabba* in such contexts means "advise, correct" rather than
    more generally "speak to". Thus the *[brahmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* is
    not the "silent treatment".

[^507]: The commentary says this line was added at the Council.

[^508]: Even on his deathbed, the Buddha retains mastery over his mind.

[^509]: Following the commentary, which reads this as a question.
    Anuruddha was renowned for his psychic powers. Note that Ānanda and
    Anuruddha have immediately adopted the forms of address recommended
    by the Buddha above.

[^510]: Each of these characters reveal something of themselves in their
    verses. Sahampati, as a royal deity, emphasizes the universal nature
    of the teaching and the grandeur of the Buddha.

[^511]: "Bag of bones" is a loose rendering of *samussaya*.

[^512]: Less creative than [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}, Sakka repeats a famous
    verse spoken by the Buddha at [SN
    15.20:8.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.20/en/sujato#8.1) and [DN
    17:2.17.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.17.5).

[^513]: Anuruddha was a reclusive meditator who specialized in
    mindfulness of breathing.

[^514]: Ānanda has the most emotional reaction. While Anuruddha speaks
    only of peace, Ānanda empathizes with those who were distraught.

[^515]: Text omits "with hair disheveled" (*kese pakiriya*) when
    describing the shaven-headed monks.

[^516]: "Still on the same business" (*teneva [karaṇīyena]{lang="sa"}*)
    calls back to [DN
    16:5.20.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.20.1), where
    they were said to be "on some business" (*kenacideva
    [karaṇīyena]{lang="sa"}*). They had been discussing all night.

[^517]: An uplifting response to tragedy, full of beauty and
    celebration.

[^518]: It seem unlikely that everyone simply forgot. It was probably
    the custom to wait seven days before the cremation.

[^519]: "Unworn" is *ahata*, as at [DN
    14:1.33.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.33.9) and [Kd
    1:1.6.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.6.2).

[^520]: "Coronation" is *[makuṭabandhana]{lang="sa"}*, "the binding of
    the crown". The commentary says there was, fittingly, an auspicious
    decorative royal hall there; perhaps too the name was felt to pun
    with *muktabandhana*, "freedom from ties".

[^521]: I think *sandhi* here means "covered without gaps".

[^522]: With the passing of [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and
    [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}, [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} was the most
    senior of the remaining leading mendicants. As a solitary recluse,
    it was unusual for him to be travelling with such a large group, or
    with anyone at all really. He was to cite the events depicted here
    at the start of the First Council ([Kd
    1:1.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#1.1.1)).

[^523]: A follower of the Bamboo-staffed Ascetic [Gosāla]{lang="sa"}
    ([DN 2:19.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#19.1)). \| This
    may be an inspiration for the so-called "Flower Sermon", a medieval
    Zen story that depicts the Buddha holding up a flower and
    Mahakassapa smiling.

[^524]: Compare [Bu Pc
    72](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc72/en/sujato). The
    syntax is clumsy here, perhaps deliberately so.

[^525]: Here *[sarīrāneva]{lang="sa"}* is plural and so must mean
    "relics", whereas previously it was singular, "corpse".

[^526]: As when he was born ([DN
    14:1.28.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.28.1)).

[^527]: [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"} would have learned of the news from
    spies. It is a 600 km round trip to [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} and back,
    which a mounted messenger could make in fourteen days.

[^528]: A bold move, considering that his designs on the Vajjis were no
    secret. Perhaps he was seeking a pretext for war. The justification
    for taking a share of relics is caste, rather than practice of the
    Dhamma.

[^529]: Both the tribe and the town are exceedingly obscure, mentioned
    nowhere else in early texts. They must have been a small clan
    nearby.

[^530]: The Koliyans were south-eastern neighbors of the Sakyans, and
    several of their towns and people feature in the early texts.

[^531]: This brahmin is mentioned nowhere else.

[^532]: *[Dassāma]{lang="sa"}* ("we shall give") is the future second
    plural of *dadati*.

[^533]: The brahmin [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} appears suddenly in the narrative,
    a reminder that there were many more people than the ones who are
    mentioned. The suttas record two encounters with a brahmin of this
    name: one is the wondrous story of seeing the Buddhas footprints
    ([AN 4.36](https://suttacentral.net/an4.36/en/sujato)), while the
    other discusses the five kinds of brahmin ([AN
    5.192](https://suttacentral.net/an5.192/en/sujato)).

[^534]: The fear of war was justified and the resolution achieved by
    [Doṇa]{lang="sa"} probably marks the last time these parties
    achieved a diplomatic outcome. The relative peace that had lasted
    most of the Buddha's life was crumbling. We hear of war or threats
    of war between the Kosalans and the Magadhans, the Magadhans and the
    Vajjis, the Sakyans and the Koliyans, the Kosalans and the Mallas,
    and the Kosalans and the Sakyans. It is probably because of the
    latter two conflicts that [Viḍūḍabha]{lang="sa"}---Pasenadi's son
    and the newly crowned king of Kosala---did not send an emissary to
    the funeral. By sparking conflicts with former allies the Sakyans
    and Mallas, [Viḍūḍabha]{lang="sa"} undid the successes of his father
    and fatally weakened the Kosalan Empire. When the dust cleared a few
    decades later, all these lands had been consumed by Magadha.

[^535]: Thus begins the practice of establishing Buddhism by interring
    relics in a stupa.

[^536]: The Moriyas were a minor clan of the region, unmentioned outside
    of this passage, but their obscurity was not to last long. About a
    century after these events, Chandragupta the Moriyan, having won the
    Magadhan crown from the Nandas, proceeded to route the Greeks in the
    west. His empire, which covered most of northern India, was further
    expanded to the south by his son Bindusara and grandson Ashoka,
    under whom the Mauryan Empire became the greatest of all Indian
    empires. Thus [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}'s expansionist dreams were
    ultimately fulfilled beyond his imagining.

[^537]: The commentary says this summary was added at the Council.

[^538]: The commentary says this line was added at the Third Council,
    which was held about 150 years after the Buddha under Ashoka. The
    Buddha's life was already fading into legend.

[^539]: According to the commentary, the remainder of the text was added
    by the monks of Sri Lanka. Note, however, that this verse and the
    next are fairly similar to those in the Sanskrit text. Since that is
    a northern text, it seems unlikely these verses were composed in Sri
    Lanka.

[^540]: "Offering" is *[āyāga]{lang="sa"}*.

[^541]: Picking up the story of the Buddha's past life as King
    [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} from [DN
    16:5.17.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.17.1).

[^542]: From here we leave [DN
    16](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato) behind and with it any
    semblance of realism. Some of these details are shared with [SN
    22.96](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.96/en/sujato), which however
    does not mention the name [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"}.

[^543]: Readings vary. The Sanskrit text has *[saptapauruṣā]{lang="sa"}
    [ardhacaturthapauruṣāś]{lang="sa"} ca [nikhātā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^544]: I think the point is that they listened to the music rather than
    doing bad things.

[^545]: This is specific instance, so I use past tense. Where it is an
    abstract description of a legendary past, I use the present tense to
    denote an eternal or mythic present.

[^546]: The wheel is firstly the sun and secondly the wheel of the
    chariots that drove the Indo-Europeans in their conquests. It is the
    manifestation of unstoppable power. The solar imagery is reflected
    in the name [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} ("Great Splendor"). The whole
    story reflects the Indo-European dream of universal domination.

[^547]: Many of the details in this myth echo the Brahmanical horse
    sacrifice. Since the horse was the primary source of Indo-European
    dominion, its sacrifice served to authorize the power of a king. It
    was a costly and dangerous rite that was attempted only by the
    greatest of sovereigns. \| *[Bhiṅkāra]{lang="sa"}* ("ceremonial
    vase") and *abbhukkirati* ("besprinkled") are elevated terms.

[^548]: In the horse sacrifice, the horse is released for a year, while
    the king follows it with his army, claiming any land that it wanders
    on as his.

[^549]: Read *[bhuñjati]{lang="sa"}* at [MN
    98:10.30](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#10.30) with
    *[yathābhuttañca]{lang="sa"} [bhuñjatha]{lang="sa"}* at [DN
    17:1.9.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.9.4), [DN
    26:6.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#6.7), and [MN
    129:35.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn129/en/sujato#35.7). These have
    sometimes been rendered "eat", "enjoy", or "govern". But compare the
    archaic English "use" meaning "the benefit or profit of lands". Thus
    *[yathābhuttañca]{lang="sa"} [bhuñjatha]{lang="sa"}* means "use as
    has been used", i.e. "maintain the current level of taxation".

[^550]: The Wheel plunges into the seas, while the sacrificial horse is
    born in the western and eastern seas.

[^551]: Historically, India has usually been divided into squabbling
    realms, but from an early age there was a dream of a unified and
    peaceful continent.

[^552]: "At the High Court" (*[atthakaraṇapamukhe]{lang="sa"}*) is
    uncertain. *Attha-* has many variants, including
    *[aḍḍa]{lang="sa"}-* and *[aṭṭa]{lang="sa"}-*.
    *[Atthakaraṇa]{lang="sa"}* normally refers to a king "sitting in
    judgment" as at [SN
    3.7:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.7/en/sujato#1.5) or [MN
    89:13.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn89/en/sujato#13.3). Here,
    however it is a place. *-Pamukha* is a standard descriptor of the
    attributes of a wheel-turning monarch in the sense of "finest" (eg.
    [DN 17:2.5.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.5.1)) rather
    than "entrance". Thus I take it as meaning "the supreme place of
    judgment" i.e. "High Court".

[^553]: The white elephant is a symbol of royalty to this day. The
    description recalls Indra's elephant [Airāvata]{lang="sa"}. \| For
    *[sattappatiṭṭho]{lang="sa"}*, the commentary has
    *[susaṇṭhitaaṅgapaccaṅga]{lang="sa"}* ("well-grounded on each and
    every limb"), a sense confirmed by the [Mūlasarvāstivāda]{lang="sa"}
    [Bhaiṣajyavastu]{lang="sa"} which has *[saptāṅgaḥ]{lang="sa"}
    [supratiṣṭhito]{lang="sa"}* ("well-established on seven limbs"). The
    subcommentary lists the four feet, trunk, tail, and penis
    (*[varaṅga]{lang="sa"}*).

[^554]: The sacrificial horse is likewise white with black head or
    forequarters. It is identified with the sun, thus being a
    "sky-walker". "Thundercloud" (*[valāhaka]{lang="sa"}*; Sanskrit
    *[balāhaka]{lang="sa"}*) is the name of one of the four horses of
    [Kṛṣṇa]{lang="sa"}'s chariot in the [Mahābharata]{lang="sa"}. The
    description here also recalls the Vedic sacred horse
    *[uccaiḥśravas]{lang="sa"}*.

[^555]: The "commander" (*[pariṇāyaka]{lang="sa"}*) is mostly found in
    Buddhist texts of this context, and is not a regular term of
    governance. This passage shows that he was responsible for
    management of the realm, while below he appears as commander of the
    army ([DN 17:2.8.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#2.8.2)).
    Elsewhere he is said to excel in strategy ([AN
    5.134:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/an5.134/en/sujato#2.5)).

[^556]: The jarring inclusion of "women" (*[itthī]{lang="sa"}*) in this
    list probably refers to state-sponsored prostitution.

[^557]: As at [DN 5:19.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#19.1).

[^558]: The palace is named "Principle" (*dhamma*) in recognition of the
    king being subject to a higher law. Normally I translate
    *[pāsāda]{lang="sa"}* as "stilt longhouse" but here something
    grander is meant.

[^559]: For *[kūṭāgāra]{lang="sa"}* as "chamber" see [MN
    37:8.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#8.10).

[^560]: Thus denying the doctrine of [Pūraṇa]{lang="sa"} Kassapa at [DN
    2:17.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#17.5). This is the
    recognition, at least partially, of right view.

[^561]: The *[mahāviyūha]{lang="sa"}* must have been some kind of
    structure at the entrance to the palace, a "foyer".

[^562]: These are the three factors of right thought. The king
    skillfully uses a transition in physical space to set up his
    intention to meditate.

[^563]: Here as in [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato),
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* is not a uniquely Buddhist practice.

[^564]: This segment breaks the expected pattern of "foremost" things.

[^565]: Not the British car of the same name. The chariot is the source
    of victory in battle.

[^566]: Read *[dukūlasandanāni]{lang="sa"}*, where *[dukūla]{lang="sa"}*
    is "fine cloth, silk" and *sandana* is "cord, tether".

[^567]: An odd detail. Maybe the sound of the elephants disturbed his
    meditation?

[^568]: Like Ānanda at [DN
    16:5.13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.13.1).

[^569]: He makes it clear that this will not be an intimate visit.

[^570]: The aorist is not past tense, as it is governed by
    *[mā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^571]: "Desire" is *chanda*, the first of the four bases of psychic
    power, which in [DN
    16:3.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.3.1) are said to
    lead to long life. By urging him to live long, she inverts the
    [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{lang="sa"} where Ānanda fails to do the same.

[^572]: Implying that Ānanda was right to not beg the Buddha to live
    long.

[^573]: At [AN 6.16:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.16/en/sujato#2.2)
    this advice is given by Nakula's mother.

[^574]: Like Ānanda at [DN
    16:5.13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.13.1).

[^575]: This contrasts with the Buddha's last meal at [DN
    16:4.20.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.20.1), which
    caused sickness and distress. The Buddha was rejecting existence
    entirely, whereas [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} was continuing in a
    pleasant form of conditioned existence.

[^576]: After [DN
    5:21.16](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#21.16), this is the
    second [Jātaka]{lang="sa"} in the [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}.

[^577]: Accepting the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"}'s reading of
    *[vessinī]{lang="sa"}*. I believe the variant
    *[velāmikā]{lang="sa"}* is a ghost word contaminated from [AN
    9.20:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.20/en/sujato#4.1).

[^578]: This picks up from the events of [DN
    16:2.5.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#2.5.1), which
    however discusses only the [Ñātikans]{lang="sa"} (who are reckoned
    among the Vajjis). Like [DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato), it bears many signs of
    a late sutta. The overall theme is the presence of a cosmic order
    where the liberating teaching of the Buddha is reconciled with the
    requirements of worldly power.

[^579]: This list of ten nations is unique. The omission of the
    [Aṅgas]{lang="sa"} and Magadhans is noted below. The more famous
    list of "sixteen nations" adds Avanti and Assaka in the south, and
    [Gandhāra]{lang="sa"} and Kamboja in the north-west (eg. [AN
    3.70:28.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.70/en/sujato#28.3)). The
    Buddha did not visit these lands, which explains why they are
    omitted.

[^580]: "Devotees" is *[paricāraka]{lang="sa"}*, which normally means
    "servant". It is not in the relevant passages of DN 16. This sense
    is found in only a couple of other places, both late ([Snp
    5.18:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.18/en/sujato#1.2), [Kd
    1:22.14.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#22.14.8)).

[^581]: Bearing in mind that none of the nations were actually mentioned
    in the relevant [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{lang="sa"} passage, this
    whole introduction is framed to emphasize the importance of Magadha
    to Buddhism, especially given the problematic character of
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}. In the decades following the Buddha's
    death, the Buddhist community adapted to a new political landscape
    which for a time saw the entirety of Buddhism contained within the
    sprawling Magadhan empire.

[^582]: As we known from [DN 2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato),
    [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"} had recently been murdered by
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}.

[^583]: A not-so-subtle hint of the changes under
    [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}. The passing of [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}
    signifies the crumbling of the social order that prevailed in the
    Buddha's lifetime, bringing with it the immediate threat of war and
    chaos. This sutta establishes a timeless order that persists while
    worldly conditions fluctuate.

[^584]: Elsewhere the suttas say that [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"} went for
    refuge ([DN 4:6.33](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#6.33)),
    while the Vinaya says he was in fact a stream-enterer ([Kd
    1:22.9.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#22.9.1)),
    which is confirmed below. The Jains, however, claim him as one of
    their own but say he went to hell for committing suicide. Like his
    son [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}, it is likely that he frequented several
    teachers in his realm.

[^585]: Near the town of [Uruvelā]{lang="sa"} on the bank of the
    [Nerañjarā]{lang="sa"} River at the place known today as Bodhgaya.

[^586]: "Suggestion" is *[parikathaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, which elsewhere
    occurs in the Vinaya ([Kd
    7:1.5.16](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd7/en/sujato#1.5.16)) and
    the Abhidhamma [Vibhaṅga]{lang="sa"} ([Vb
    17:43.2](https://suttacentral.net/vb17/en/sujato#43.2)) in the sense
    of "hint".

[^587]: Normally *[aṭṭhiṁ]{lang="sa"} [katvā]{lang="sa"}
    [manasikatvā]{lang="sa"} [sabbaṁ]{lang="sa"} [cetasā]{lang="sa"}
    [samannāharitvā]{lang="sa"}* describes listening to Dhamma. This
    whole process seems unusually laborious.

[^588]: *[Nāmadheyyaṁ]{lang="sa"}* means "name (borne by someone or
    something)", not "one who bears the name" ([MN
    50:22.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#22.1)).

[^589]: *Janavasabha* is "chief of men", spelled *janesabha* at [DN
    20:10.10](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#10.10) and [DN
    32:10.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#10.9). The synonym
    *[narāsabha]{lang="sa"}* is an occasional poetic epithet of the
    Buddha ([Snp
    3.11:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato#6.2), [Snp
    5.1:21.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.1/en/sujato#21.3), [SN
    11.3:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.3/en/sujato#14.2)). In
    Sanskrit we find *[puruṣaṛṣabha]{lang="sa"}* in the same sense.

[^590]: *[Uḷāravaṇṇa]{lang="sa"}* describes beautiful people at [MN
    96:7.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#7.8).

[^591]: Read *ito*. I think this implies what is stated more explicitly
    in Anuruddha's partly parallel verses at [Thag
    16.9:23.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag16.9/en/sujato#23.1): after
    each of seven rebirths under [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} he can become a
    king of men. This explains the name Janavasabha.

[^592]: It is rare to see *[saṁsāra]{lang="sa"}* used as a countable
    noun, but see [Thag
    2.48:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.48/en/sujato#2.2).

[^593]: As a stream-enterer he is freed from any lower rebirths, yet he
    still aspires to a higher realization.

[^594]: In this idiom, the verb for "aware" varies between
    *[sañjānāti]{lang="sa"}*, *[jānāti]{lang="sa"}*,
    *[pajānāti]{lang="sa"}*, and *[sampajānāti]{lang="sa"}*.

[^595]: Compare [SN
    1.50:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.50/en/sujato#5.1) and [SN
    2.24:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.24/en/sujato#6.1).

[^596]: It is not just the Vajjis and the Buddhist [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}
    who meet frequently in a hall to discuss business, but the gods as
    well. Here we get a rare glimpse into how the heavens work, or more
    to the point, how depictions of heavenly proceedings act as a
    template for how things should be on earth.

[^597]: The thirty-three and the Four Great Kings are both present; the
    heavenly realms are not shut off from one another.

[^598]: For *vipakkamati* compare [MN
    127:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn127/en/sujato#11.1).

[^599]: Compare [DN
    11:80.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn11/en/sujato#80.12).

[^600]: For *[vipāko]{lang="sa"} bhavissati* in discerning the results
    of signs, compare [DN
    1:1.24.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.24.2).

[^601]: See [AN
    3.127:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.127/en/sujato#2.3).

[^602]: This phrase is also at [DN
    19:16.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#16.8), but apart
    from that the words *[pakativaṇṇa]{lang="sa"}* ("normal
    appearance"), *[anabhisambhavanīya]{lang="sa"}* ("imperceptible"),
    and *cakkhupatha* ("visual range") are all unique in the early
    texts.

[^603]: For the unique term "human form" (*[mānusaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [viggahaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) compare the Vinaya phrase
    *[manussaviggahaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ([Bu Pj
    3:2.49.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj3/en/sujato#2.49.1)).

[^604]: Also appearing in [DN
    21:1.8.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.8.3), [DN
    20:10.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#10.11), and [SN
    35.119](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.119/en/sujato),
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} ("Five-Crest") was a handsome and virile
    deity of the *gandhabbas*.

[^605]: *[Bhāsittha]{lang="sa"}* is 3rd singular aorist middle voice.

[^606]: Compare [MN
    91:21.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#21.4).

[^607]: Everything [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} says is just a bit off. Here
    he adopts an idiom commonly used by the Buddha, but in third person
    rather than the Buddha's second person; and he asks only
    rhetorically, where the Buddha engages with his audience. If it were
    only this one example it would mean nothing, but similar changes
    happen throughout. I believe this is a subtle literary device that
    tells two narratives to two audiences. To potential converts it
    sounds like [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} is giving a ringing and learned
    endorsement of Buddhism, while to knowledgeable Buddhists he appears
    as less than well versed in the teachings. I note these eccentric
    wordings as we proceed.

[^608]: The sutta began by recounting those who have achieved various
    stages of awakening. But escape from rebirth threatens the gods;
    this potentially fraught relationship is played out in [MN
    49](https://suttacentral.net/mn49/en/sujato).
    [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} is preempting such arguments by pointing
    out that many of the Buddha's followers are reborn among the gods
    and do not escape transmigration, at least not for now. This is no
    trivial metaphysical argument. In order for Buddhism to prevail, it
    must show that its radical soteriology is compatible with worldly
    prosperity, lest it face opposition from kings and other temporal
    powers. The gods act as proxies to demonstrate the appropriate
    behavior for terrestrial kings. This is why the leading character is
    [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"}/Janavasabha, who straddles the two realms.

[^609]: [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} begins sharing the Buddha's teaching
    with the gods, starting with the bases of psychic power that
    featured prominently in DN 16. Here, however, he focuses on the
    worldly dimensions of psychic powers, ignoring the liberating
    dimension that was central to the Buddha. This sets the pattern for
    the teachings to follow, except for the very last.

[^610]: *[Yāva]{lang="sa"} [supaññattā]{lang="sa"}*, which is also at
    [MN 51:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn51/en/sujato#4.3), is a
    variation of the common exclamation *[yāva]{lang="sa"}
    [subhāsita]{lang="sa"}*. The phrase *[iddhipahutāya]{lang="sa"}
    [iddhivisavitāya]{lang="sa"} [iddhivikubbanatāya]{lang="sa"}* is
    unique. The [Paṭisambhidāmagga]{lang="sa"} draws on this passage to
    explain *vikubbana* both as a general term for development of
    psychic powers ([Ps
    3.2:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/ps3.2/en/sujato#4.3)) and as
    specific kind of psychic power, namely the transformation of one's
    apparent form as demonstrated by [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} ([Ps
    3.2:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/ps3.2/en/sujato#15.1)).

[^611]: These "three opportunities" are not found elsewhere.

[^612]: This unique term is the reverse of the phrase that begins the
    first *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*. The passage, however, speaks only of
    lifestyle rather than deep meditation.

[^613]: "Aloof" (*[asaṁsaṭṭha]{lang="sa"}*) is a synonym of "secluded"
    (*vivicca*). The *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* formulas are extremely stable
    and it is rare to find them played with like this.

[^614]: Since *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* arises from pleasure, it cannot be
    meant here.

[^615]: "Coarse physical, verbal, and mental processes"
    (*[oḷārikā]{lang="sa"} [kāyasaṅkhārā]{lang="sa"}
    ...[vacīsaṅkhārā]{lang="sa"} ... [cittasaṅkhārā]{lang="sa"}*) is
    another unique term. They are probably to be identified with the
    three "processes" of [MN
    44:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#14.2).

[^616]: This builds off [DN
    1:2.24.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.24.1), but the
    full phrase is only here and [DN
    19:7.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#7.2).

[^617]: Normally *[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}* is taught "in order to
    purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an
    end of pain and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to
    realize extinguishment" (eg. [DN
    22:1.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#1.7)). Here, in yet
    another unique phrasing, a more humble goal is sought.

[^618]: Again the liberating dimension is ignored in favor of worldly
    psychic abilities. This is another unique formulation.

[^619]: Also found at [AN
    7.45:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an7.45/en/sujato#1.1). At [MN
    44:12.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#12.4) the four
    right efforts are said to be the "prerequisites of immersion". Here
    at last [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} introduces the liberating dimension
    of the path as a whole.

[^620]: Also at [SN 45.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.1/en/sujato),
    etc.

[^621]: To the standard passage on the qualities of the Dhamma,
    [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} clumsily tacks on the line spoken by the
    Buddha when he was persuaded by [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} to teach ([SN
    6.1:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.1/en/sujato#10.1), [DN
    14:3.7.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.7.13), [MN
    26:21.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#21.6), [MN
    85:45.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn85/en/sujato#45.6)).

[^622]: Finally the question is answered, although the number of deaths
    is obviously exaggerated. We cannot estimate the population size at
    the time with any confidence. But we know that
    [Pāṭaliputta]{lang="sa"} under Ashoka covered about 25 km², which
    suggests a population somewhere around 250,000. Probably there were
    a few million people in the whole of Magadha.

[^623]: The commentary identifies these as non-returners, but this is
    unlikely as *[puññābhāga]{lang="sa"}* ("share of merit") indicates
    those who do good for the sake of a good rebirth rather than
    liberation ([AN
    6.63:30.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.63/en/sujato#30.2)). There
    would have been countless more of such good folk than
    stream-enterers, whereas the number of non-returners, as indicated
    by the count of the [Ñātikans]{lang="sa"}, would have been small,
    not "countless". This verse is also at [SN
    6.13:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.13/en/sujato#7.1), where the
    commentary says nothing of non-returners.

[^624]: [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} lives longer than the lesser gods so he
    has a broader perspective. He emphasizes the long-term stability of
    cosmic order, which prevails through the crises that afflict the
    short-lived kingdoms of men.

[^625]: Astonishingly, this sutta traces its textual lineage directly to
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}, exactly like the Brahmanical texts (eg.
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 6.5.4). Of course,
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} gets his teaching from the Buddha, but this is
    clearly copying the Brahmanical model.

[^626]: Here Ānanda plays a key role as the linchpin of the oral
    tradition. It is likely that not just the
    [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{lang="sa"} itself, but all these suttas of
    this cycle were composed by Ānanda or his students.

[^627]: With this unique ending, there is no claim that this sutta was
    heard by the mendicants in the usual way. Rather it makes its
    purpose explicit, to act as a means to widely propagate the Dhamma.
    The [Mahāparinibbānasutta]{lang="sa"} also speaks of the spread of
    the Dhamma, and the Janavasabhasutta indicates some of the means by
    which that was achieved in the decades following the Buddha's death;
    in particular, by allying itself with the ascendant power of
    Magadha.

[^628]: We were introduced to [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} in [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato), which is similar to
    the current sutta in many other details as well. Thus this sutta can
    be considered as a distant cousin to the
    [Mahāparinibbāna]{lang="sa"} cycle.

[^629]: The council of gods described by Janavasabha at [DN
    18:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato#12.1), while
    otherwise similar, took place at the entry to a rainy season,
    whereas this one is at the end of a rainy season. This cannot have
    been the Buddha's last rains, for he was already in Vajji by then.

[^630]: For "genuine praise" (*[yathābhucce]{lang="sa"}
    [vaṇṇe]{lang="sa"}*), see [DN
    1:1.28.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.28.1).

[^631]: This set of eight is not found elsewhere. \| "Proffered" is
    *[payirudāhāsi]{lang="sa"}*, a unique term in early texts.

[^632]: Sakka adopts the same rhetorical style as
    [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    18:20.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato#20.2)).

[^633]: Compare [DN
    18:25.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato#25.1).

[^634]: *[Paṭipadā]{lang="sa"}* is instrumental.

[^635]: I don't think this idea is found elsewhere in quite this way.
    Normally it is said that the path leads to [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"} like
    the rivers lead to the ocean (eg. [SN
    45.114:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.114/en/sujato#1.1)).

[^636]: This item is unique.

[^637]: Another unique item.

[^638]: This is normally true, but in some cases the Buddha left a
    badly-behaved community ([MN
    48](https://suttacentral.net/mn48/en/sujato)), dismissed misbehaving
    monks (eg. [AN
    8.10:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an8.10/en/sujato#2.2)), or even
    dismissed a large community ([MN
    67](https://suttacentral.net/mn67/en/sujato)). \| The "joy of
    solitude" is *[ekārāmataṁ]{lang="sa"}* .

[^639]: Also at [DN
    29:29.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#29.5), [AN
    4.23:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an4.23/en/sujato#4.1), and [Iti
    112:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/iti112/en/sujato#5.1).

[^640]: *[Pariyositasaṅkappo]{lang="sa"}* ("achieved all he wished for")
    is a synonym of the more common *[paripuṇṇasaṅkappo]{lang="sa"}*
    (eg. [MN 29:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn29/en/sujato#2.5)).

[^641]: This impossibility is also at [AN
    1.277:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an1.277/en/sujato#1.1) and [MN
    115:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn115/en/sujato#14.1). \| "In one
    solar system" (*[ekissā]{lang="sa"} [lokadhātuyā]{lang="sa"}*): a
    single *[lokadhātu]{lang="sa"}* encompasses a single terrestrial
    world with a single moon and sun.

[^642]: It is not common to wish for the Buddha's long life, but we do
    find this sentiment expressed in a conversation between
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and Ānanda ([SN
    21.2:3.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.2/en/sujato#3.5)).

[^643]: "Having appraised" (*[saṅkhāya]{lang="sa"}*) is glossed by the
    commentary with "having known" (*[jānitvā]{lang="sa"}*). Compare the
    discussion on "judgmentalism" at [DN
    1:1.3.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.3.1).

[^644]: Disampati means "head of the directions", i.e. king of all the
    land. He and his story are found nowhere else in the early texts.

[^645]: "Steward" is Govinda, literally "lord of cows". The "high
    priest" (*purohita*) was a hereditary office, a learned ritualist
    and adviser attached to a specific family. For royal families the
    post could be highly contested. The closeness of the role is shown
    in that aristocratic families could be referred to by the lineage of
    the high priest.

[^646]: While the current sutta does not explicitly identify their
    realm, [Dīpavaṁsa]{lang="sa"} iii 40 records Disampati and
    [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} as kings of [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}. This fits with the
    geographical layout depicted in this sutta, with [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}
    at the center. The story, then, depicts the establishment of
    Brahmanical kings across India from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}.

[^647]: [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"} means "guardian of the sacred flame", i.e.
    someone who maintains the Vedic fire ritual (see below at [DN
    19:47.26](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#47.26)). There was
    another [Jotipāla]{lang="sa"} in the time of Buddha Kassapa at [MN
    81:6.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato#6.2), and another
    who was a religious founder of the past ([AN
    6.54:18.1](https://suttacentral.net/an6.54/en/sujato#18.1), [AN
    7.73:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/an7.73/en/sujato#2.5)). Despite
    the popularity of the name in Pali, it does not seem to appear in
    Sanskrit sources. Given that it appears in Pali only in legendary
    contexts, it is probably a vocational epithet.

[^648]: The king's only care, it seems, is not for the passing of his
    friend, but that he no longer gets to indulge in whatever he wants.

[^649]: This shows that Govinda is an office rather than a personal
    name.

[^650]: Following the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading rather than the
    PTS (*[nānusāsi]{lang="sa"} ... [nānusāsati]{lang="sa"}*). It seems
    required by the context that he does more than his father.

[^651]: Following PTS reading *[sukhaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [edheyyātha]{lang="sa"}*.

[^652]: The meaning of *[sakaṭamukhaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("front of a cart")
    is clarified by comparison with the parallels. T 8 is identical (),
    while DA 3 expresses a similar idea more briefly (). The
    [Mahāvastu]{lang="sa"} (Mvu 85.17) confirms this sense with
    *[dakṣiṇena]{lang="sa"} [saṁkṣiptā]{lang="sa"}
    [śakaṭamukhasaṁsthitaṁ]{lang="sa"}*. These appear to demonstrate a
    knowledge of the shape of the Indian subcontinent. Below it says
    that each of the kingdoms is shaped like the front of a cart, just
    as India is as a whole.

[^653]: Neither Rhys Davids nor Walshe translate this line, but it
    receives an extensive discussion in the commentary. It says that six
    kingdoms were arranged around [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}'s kingdom in the
    middle, like an umbrella (*[vitānasadisaṁ]{lang="sa"}*).

[^654]: The verses tell the realms starting with the rising sun at
    [Kaliṅga]{lang="sa"} in the east and proceeding clockwise
    (*[padakkhiṇā]{lang="sa"}*) until the circle is complete with
    [Aṅga]{lang="sa"} on the [Kaliṅga]{lang="sa"} border. Thus the
    original center was probably the last place on the list,
    [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}, which is indeed geographically central.

[^655]: [Kaliṅga]{lang="sa"} was a coastal realm in modern Odisha and
    Andhra Pradesh. There is no consensus on the exact location of
    Dantapura.

[^656]: Assaka stretched from [Kaliṅga]{lang="sa"}'s western border
    across the interior. Potana is modern Bodhan in Telangana state.

[^657]: *Mahesaya* of the Pali editions is a variant spelling for
    *[māhissatī]{lang="sa"}*; [Mahāvastu]{lang="sa"} has
    *[māhiṣmatī]{lang="sa"}*. It is in present-day Madhya Pradesh, on
    the banks of Narmada River, and is perhaps to be identified with
    modern Maheshwar.

[^658]: [Sovīra]{lang="sa"} was on the lower Indus, and Roruka is
    identified with modern Rohri in Sindh province, Pakistan. It is
    implausible that they received Aryan culture from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}.

[^659]: [Mithilā]{lang="sa"} was the capital of Videha, to the north
    east of the Vajjian federation, nestled against the Himalayas.
    [Mithilā]{lang="sa"} was a dominant kingdom before the Buddha, its
    king Janaka featuring prominently in early [Upaniṣads]{lang="sa"}.
    It features rarely in the suttas ([MN
    91](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato), [Thig
    6.2](https://suttacentral.net/thig6.2/en/sujato), [Thig
    13.4](https://suttacentral.net/thig13.4/en/sujato)) and had
    apparently declined in importance. Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}
    1.4.1.10--19 depicts its origins in terms of the spread of
    fire-worship from the west by its founding king [Māthava]{lang="sa"}
    Videgha with his priest Gotama [Rāhūgaṇa]{lang="sa"}.

[^660]: [Campā]{lang="sa"} is modern Champapuri near Bhagalpur in Bihar
    state, not far from West Bengal. [Aṅga]{lang="sa"} lay between the
    Chandan river to the west and the Rajmahal hills to the east. In the
    centuries before the Buddha it expanded its dominion to the sea on
    the south-east and Magadha in the west. But with the
    [Kaliṅgas]{lang="sa"} pushing back from the coast and the rise of
    [Bimbisāra]{lang="sa"} in Magadha, they were pushed back to their
    ancestral lands and fell under Magadhan dominion.

[^661]: Varanasi, one of the oldest cities in the world, was the capital
    of the [Kāsī]{lang="sa"} kingdom. It lost its status as an
    independent kingdom shortly before the Buddha, when it was taken
    over by Kosala. It appears in countless Buddhist stories of the past
    as the dominant city of the region in what appears to be a timeless
    and ageless past. However, despite its great antiquity, it is a
    historical settlement, of which the discovered remains date back to
    perhaps 1200 BCE; it was a capital city from perhaps 800 BCE.

[^662]: The names of the aristocrat kings---most of which are difficult
    to identify from other sources---are listed in an abruptly-inserted
    verse. The names are missing from the parallels in
    [Mahāvastu]{lang="sa"} and DA 3, but T 8 appears to have the same
    list of names in the same order, except with [Reṇu]{lang="sa"} at
    the start. Rhys Davids proposes to assign each one to a kingdom as
    listed in the same order. This seems to work for the first four
    names, as [Ja 424](https://suttacentral.net/ja424/en/sujato),
    invoking this sutta, identifies Bharata as king of
    [Sovīra]{lang="sa"}. But it falls apart with [Reṇu]{lang="sa"}, who
    as we have seen, belongs in [Kāsi]{lang="sa"} rather than Videha.

[^663]: "Bharata" is the name of an individual king, while they are
    collectively known as "[Bhāratas]{lang="sa"}" (with a long initial
    *[ā]{lang="sa"}* due to secondary derivation). [Ja
    424](https://suttacentral.net/ja424/en/sujato), invoking this sutta,
    identifies Bharata as king of [Sovīra]{lang="sa"}.

[^664]: Here *[bhāratā]{lang="sa"}* means "kings of India" or perhaps,
    if read together with the preceding verses, "kingdoms of India".
    India was called [Bhārata]{lang="sa"} after the legendary King
    Bharata of [Hastināpura]{lang="sa"} (Delhi), founder of the Lunar
    dynasty, conqueror of India, and sire of the warring tribes of the
    [Mahābharata]{lang="sa"}. His story is told in the
    [Saṁbhavapara]{lang="sa"} of the [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"}. The name
    represents the success of Vedic culture across the subcontinent.

[^665]: In spiritual circles, such rumors spread like wildfire in an
    Australian summer.

[^666]: The ancient Brahmanical teachers are invoked to justify the
    Buddhist rains retreat. \| Compassion is one of the "meditations of
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}" (*[brahmavihāra]{lang="sa"}*). Normally the
    suttas speak of the absorptions (*[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*) and of the
    meditation on compassion (*[karuṇā]{lang="sa"}*), but the idea of an
    "absorption on compassion" is unique to this sutta.

[^667]: Compare [MN
    51:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn51/en/sujato#10.3), where the
    same construction is a site for the sacrifice.

[^668]: "Deathless" from a Brahmanical perspective, but very much within
    the realm of *[saṁsāra]{lang="sa"}* from a Buddhist perspective.

[^669]: *Brahme* is the normal vocative for *[brahmā]{lang="sa"}*.
    However in verse it is sometimes used as vocative for
    *[brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}* (eg. [Snp
    5.1:7.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.1/en/sujato#7.3), [Snp
    5.19:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.19/en/sujato#3.4)).

[^670]: These factors are explained as a summary of the Gradual
    Training.

[^671]: "At one" (*[ekodibhūta]{lang="sa"}* or more commonly
    *[ekodibhāva]{lang="sa"}*) normally describes deep meditation, and
    is part of the formula for the second *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*. Here it
    is explained as equivalent to "seclusion" (*viveka*).

[^672]: "Putrefaction" (*[āmagandha]{lang="sa"}*) is the smell of
    (moral) decay or corruption ([AN
    3.128](https://suttacentral.net/an3.128/en/sujato), [Snp
    2.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.2/en/sujato)).

[^673]: "Desire" is (*[icchā]{lang="sa"}*). PTS reads
    *[vicikicchā]{lang="sa"}* ("doubt"), but this must be incorrect as
    the commentary explains it as "craving" (*[taṇhā]{lang="sa"}*).

[^674]: "Easy to quell" (*sunimmadaya*) is unique to this passage.

[^675]: As noted in the comment to [DN
    16:5.19.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.19.2), kingly
    clans adopted the lineage name of the high priest (*purohita*)
    during initiation.

[^676]: "True teaching" (*saddhamma*) normally describes the Buddha's
    teaching.

[^677]: "Leads to rebirth in the [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm"
    (*[brahmalokūpapattiyā]{lang="sa"}*), just as the teaching of
    [Āḷāra]{lang="sa"} [Kālāma]{lang="sa"}, based on the even more
    refined formless meditations, leads to rebirth in the dimension of
    nothingness ([MN
    36:14.14](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato#14.14)).

[^678]: Echoing the ancient hermit Araka at [AN
    7.74:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an7.74/en/sujato#2.2), who said
    life is evanescent like a dewdrop.

[^679]: It is regarded as normal that woman should renounce.

[^680]: Compare with the mass renunciation under [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}
    ([DN 14:2.16.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#2.16.6)).

[^681]: His meditation expands from compassion to include all four of
    the *[brahmavihāras]{lang="sa"}*.

[^682]: This is the third and final [Jātaka]{lang="sa"} in the
    [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}, after [DN
    5](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato) and [DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato).

[^683]: According to the doctrine of the "perfections"
    (*[pāramī]{lang="sa"}*), which emerged around two to four centuries
    after the Buddha's passing, the practices he undertook in past lives
    laid the foundation for awakening in this life. Here, however, the
    Buddha states that his former practices did not lead to awakening.
    Rather, since they were based on the wrong view of eternal bliss in
    the [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm, they only led to a good rebirth so
    long as that kamma lasted. It is the eightfold path, which the
    Buddha discovered in his final life, which leads to awakening. The
    same saying in a similar context is found at [MN
    83:21.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn83/en/sujato#21.7).

[^684]: This discourse gives an extensive account of divine beings. Some
    are familiar from elsewhere in the Pali texts, others found in
    various Brahmanical sources, while still others occur only here. For
    the names we can compare the edition of the Sanskrit text by
    Waldschmidt and Sander and available on SuttaCentral as [SF
    140](https://suttacentral.net/sf140/san/waldschmidt-sander).

[^685]: The Pure Abodes are inhabited entirely by non-returners.

[^686]: "Great congregation" is *[mahāsamaya]{lang="sa"}*.

[^687]: A village ([Bu Pj
    2:3.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj2/en/sujato#3.8)) or
    royal compound ([Bu Pc
    83:1.3.56.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc83/en/brahmali#1.3.56.1))
    was marked with a "boundary post" (*[indakhīla]{lang="sa"}*). It
    symbolized a fixed and immovable point, either in a good sense ([SN
    56.39:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.39/en/sujato#4.1)) or, as
    here, an obstacle. \| For [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"}'s
    *[ūhacca]{lang="sa"} [manejā]{lang="sa"}* read
    *[ūhacca]{lang="sa"}-m-[anejā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^688]: *[Nāga]{lang="sa"}* can refer to a class of semi-divine beings
    in a powerful serpentine form ("dragon"); a large and powerful
    snake, especially a king cobra; a bull elephant; or any powerful and
    mighty being ("giant").

[^689]: The discourse up to here is also found at [SN
    1.37](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.37/en/sujato).

[^690]: This recalls [DN
    14:1.10.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.10.1), where
    the relative sizes of the mendicant congregations of different
    Buddhas are tallied. That sutta, in another point of similarity,
    also featured a conversation with deities of the Pure Abodes.

[^691]: "Paean of praise" is *siloka*, a rare case where this means
    "verse (of praise)" rather than "fame, renown". \|
    *[Anukassāmi]{lang="sa"}* is present tense from the root *kass*, "to
    draw (up), to drag". Compare Sanskrit *[anukarṣa]{lang="sa"}* in the
    sense "invoking, summoning by incantation".

[^692]: This gives a hint as to one of the purposes of this sutta.
    Living alone in remote forests can be terrifying. Such places were
    widely believed to be haunted by all manner of supernatural
    creatures, not all of them friendly. While for an arahant this posed
    no threat, there would have been then, as there are today, many
    young or aspiring meditators who faced such challenges with
    trepidation. These verses offer succor, surrounding them with
    powerful, albeit invisible, allies.

[^693]: "Spirit" is *yakkha*. In later legend they appear as monstrous
    figures, but in the suttas they are ambiguous and may often be
    friendly to the Dhamma. Early statues of *yakkhas* at
    [Madhurā]{lang="sa"} (circa 100 BCE) depict noble and powerful
    kings, not ogres. *Yakkha* is also sometimes used more generally in
    the sense of an individual or deity.

[^694]: Colorful like the nymphs of [MN
    50:25.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#25.6) or
    [Susīma]{lang="sa"}'s gods at [SN
    2.29:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.29/en/sujato#7.1).

[^695]: Mount [Sātā]{lang="sa"} is unidentified, but according to the
    commentary it was in the middle region.

[^696]: [Vessāmitta]{lang="sa"} ("friend of all") is the name of a Vedic
    hermit. Legend has it that he was a *khattiya* who earned
    brahminhood due to his intense austerities in the remote Himalayas.
    Perhaps this is a mountain named for him, although I can find no
    trace of it in Sanskrit.

[^697]: *[Kumbhīra]{lang="sa"}* means "crocodile".

[^698]: We met two human King [Dhataraṭṭhas]{lang="sa"} ("Strongrealm")
    in the [Mahāgovindasutta]{lang="sa"}.

[^699]: "Centaur" is *gandhabba*. *Gandhabbas* are wild, sexual beings
    who, being first to yoke the horse (Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}
    5.1.4.8) and riding the steed called "Racer" (*[vājin]{lang="sa"}*,
    10.6.4.1), "take the reins" from Indra (Rig Veda 1.163.2) as his
    charioteer [Mātali]{lang="sa"}. It is likely the Sanskrit
    *gandharva* stems from the same root as the Greek *kentauro*, and
    the ultimate origin of the idea comes from the proto-Indo-Europeans,
    who rode the horse, creating a potent entity that was invincible in
    battle.

[^700]: By implication, they are renowned as being powerful as Indra,
    the king of gods who in Pali is more commonly called Sakka. It is
    also a nod to the multiplicity of divinities in the Vedic system,
    where one becomes many and many become one.

[^701]: *[Virūḷhaka]{lang="sa"}* is "growth"; he was probably a god of
    the fertile crops. In the Pali it is spelled [Virūḷha]{lang="sa"}
    here due to the meter.

[^702]: "Goblins" is *[kumbhaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}*, a race of lesser deities
    often depicted as ugly and misshapen. On the face of it,
    *[kumbhaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* means "potballs", i.e. deities whose
    testicles are as big as pots. Perhaps more likely they are related
    to the beings known as *[kuṣmāṇḍa]{lang="sa"}* in Sanskrit, whose
    bellies are round as "pumpkins".

[^703]: One of the "royal snake families" at [AN
    4.67:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.67/en/sujato#3.2). His name
    means "multiple eyes" (*[virūpa]{lang="sa"}-akkha*) for the false
    eyes on a cobra's hood.

[^704]: Also known as [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    32:7.43](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#7.43), [Snp
    2.14:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.14/en/sujato#6.1)), which
    means "Son of the Renowned" from his father [Viśrava]{lang="sa"}.
    These two names appear together elsewhere in contemporary literature
    (Atharvaveda 8,10.28c, Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 13.4.3.10),
    where, although the passages are obscure, he appears to be
    associated with wickedness, concealment, and theft. Although a god
    of wealth (*dhanada*), the name Kuvera is explained by
    lexicographers as "deformed". Probably he was originally a god of
    the underground, blessed with the earth's riches, yet deformed by
    its great pressure.

[^705]: The following verses are a treasure-trove of ancient Indian
    mythology, recording the names of deities otherwise lost to history.
    Many of the names are obscure and variant readings are recorded in
    manuscripts and noted in the commentary. My spellings follow
    Ānandajoti's translation, *[The Discourse on the Great
    Convention](https://suttacentral.nethttp://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-Translations/Safeguard/02x-Atirekani-Sattasuttani-23.htm)*,
    unless there is a reason to change. I try to identify the deities as
    best as I can, but many of them remain speculative.

[^706]: These deities are called *[dāsa]{lang="sa"}*, which normally
    means "slave" in Pali. But here, it seems, we have a singular
    instance of the old Vedic meaning, an uncivilized foe. The
    *[dāsas]{lang="sa"}* [Vṛtra]{lang="sa"}, Namuci, and
    [Vṛṣaśipra]{lang="sa"} are described as "deceivers"
    (*[māyin]{lang="sa"}*, Rig Veda 1.53.7; 2.11.10; 7.99.4; 10.73.7).
    This epithet is also used of the closely related *dasyu* (Rig Veda
    1.33.10; 4.16.9; 8.14.14; 10.73.5; see note on [DN
    5:11.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#11.5)). Such beings
    are said to be "godless" since they oppose the Vedic deities (Rig
    Veda 2.19.7; 3.31.19; 7.1.10; 10.11.6; 10.138.4, etc.), so we can
    translate as "heathen".

[^707]: I am not able to identify any of these names with confidence,
    but perhaps *[kuṭeṇḍu]{lang="sa"}* and *[viṭeṇḍu]{lang="sa"}* could
    be traced to *indu* ("moon"), thus "crooked moon" and "defective
    moon". Compare *[khaṇḍendu]{lang="sa"}*, a later term for Śiva as
    the crescent moon.

[^708]: The Sanskrit names are *[kiṭi]{lang="sa"}*,
    *[vikiṭi]{lang="sa"}*, *[bhṛgu]{lang="sa"}*, and
    *[bhṛkuṭi]{lang="sa"}*. Only *[bhṛgu]{lang="sa"}* is attested in the
    Vedas, but he was a sage, not a "crafty heathen".

[^709]: Candana appears in [MN
    134:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn134/en/sujato#6.4) and [SN
    40.11:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn40.11/en/sujato#1.1), and
    together with [Kāmaseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} in [DN
    32:10.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#10.4). *Candana*
    means "sandalwood", although the name of the god might also relate
    to its root "shining". \| *[Kāmaseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}* means "Chief of
    Sex", i.e. "Eros"; he does not seem to appear in a Brahmanical
    context.

[^710]: [Panāda]{lang="sa"} ("roarer") was the name of an ancient king
    who performed the horse sacrifice ([Thag
    2.22:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.22/en/sujato#1.1), [DN
    26:26.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#26.1)). In [Ja
    265](https://suttacentral.net/ja265/en/sujato) he is said to have
    been the son of [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} (Kuvera). \|
    [Opamañña]{lang="sa"} is a descendant of the ascended sage Upamanyu
    ("zealous one"; see note on [MN
    99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3)).

[^711]: [Mātali]{lang="sa"} is the charioteer of Sakka (i.e. Indra; [SN
    11.6:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.6/en/sujato#1.5), [MN
    83:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn83/en/sujato#14.1), etc.), a
    role he plays throughout Brahmanical literature as well. He appears
    here as one of the centaur lords, and is father to the centaur
    [Sikhaṇḍī]{lang="sa"}, [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}'s rival in love [DN
    21:1.6.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.6.8).

[^712]: The *gandharva* Citrasena ("Brightspear") appears in the
    Sanskrit [Purāṇas]{lang="sa"} as a friend of Arjuna in various
    adventures.

[^713]: *Nala* means "reed". There was a King Nala of Vidarbha whose
    love for his Queen [Damayantī]{lang="sa"} is celebrated in the
    [Mahābharata]{lang="sa"}. \| Janesabha is an alternate spelling of
    Janavasabha ([DN 18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato)).

[^714]: In [DN 21](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato) we shall
    learn of how the centaur [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} ("Fivecrest") wooed
    Timbaru's daughter [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"} ("Sunshine").

[^715]: Read *[nābhasa]{lang="sa"}*, which means "celestial, heavenly".
    The commentary says this was the name of a lake, which agrees with
    the legend that a [Nābhasa]{lang="sa"} was a son of Nala ("reed")
    and father of [Puṇḍarīka]{lang="sa"} ("lotus"). The Sanskrit here,
    however, has *[sahabhuṁ]{lang="sa"} [nāgo]{lang="sa"}*.

[^716]: *[Vesālā]{lang="sa"}* is from the adjectival form
    *[vesāla]{lang="sa"}* ("of [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}"). \| Pali *taccha*
    can represent Sanskrit *[takṣa]{lang="sa"}*, and the Sanskrit does
    indeed have *[takṣakaḥ]{lang="sa"}* here, so Tacchaka is probably
    "of [Takṣasilā]{lang="sa"}". This famous city, normally spelled
    [Takkasilā]{lang="sa"} in Pali, is Taxila in West Pakistan, an
    ancient center of learning.

[^717]: These *[nāgas]{lang="sa"}* are frequently mentioned together in
    Sanskrit literature such as the [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"} (1.31.1a,
    2.9.9a, 5.101.9c), where they are also said to come from
    [Pāyāga]{lang="sa"} (3.83.72a: *[prayāgaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [sapratiṣṭhānaṁ]{lang="sa"} [kambalāśvatarau]{lang="sa"}*).

[^718]: [Payāga]{lang="sa"} (modern Prayagraj, formerly Allahabad) is
    the sacred ford at the confluence of the Ganges and the
    [Yamunā]{lang="sa"} beside [Kosambī]{lang="sa"} (see [Bu Pj
    1:4.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#4.18)).

[^719]: The [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and [Erāvaṇa]{lang="sa"}
    *[nāgas]{lang="sa"}* also appear frequently in Sanskrit literature,
    and often in association with other deities in our text as part of a
    loose cluster of divinities (eg. [Harivamśa]{lang="sa"} 3.112--117).
    [Erāvaṇa]{lang="sa"} also appears at [Snp
    2.14:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.14/en/sujato#5.1). Here he
    is a *[nāga]{lang="sa"}* as in "dragon", but later tradition saw him
    as a *[nāga]{lang="sa"}* as in "elephant", in which role he became
    the mighty mount of Indra/Sakka.

[^720]: Here we see the eternal mythic struggle between birds and
    snakes, the creatures of the sky and the underworld.

[^721]: Birds are called "twice-born", once from the mother, once from
    the egg. "Twice-born" is also an epithet of brahmins ([Thig
    15.1:31.3](https://suttacentral.net/thig15.1/en/sujato#31.3)).

[^722]: The *[supaṇṇā]{lang="sa"}* (Sanskrit *[suparṇa]{lang="sa"}*,
    "brightwing") or *[garuḷā]{lang="sa"}* (Sanskrit
    *[garuḍā]{lang="sa"}*, "devourer") is the great eagle, king of
    birds, and later the vehicle of [Viṣṇu]{lang="sa"}. He has been
    falsely compared with the loathsome harpy; but his golden wings,
    closeness to the sun, and role as bearer of the nectar of
    immortality show that he is the Indian phoenix, the golden eagle of
    the sun. Unlike the western phoenix, he is not said to combust
    himself and be reborn anew. However this motif is merely the surface
    expression of the sun's fiery immortality. As the brother of the
    Dawn ([Aruṇa]{lang="sa"}), his golden wings at sunset "devour" the
    sun, and he disappears only to be reborn the next day.

[^723]: The Buddha reconciles even such inveterate enemies. In the
    Buddhist view, all of these beings have their place in the great
    pattern of nature.

[^724]: *Vajirahattha* ("thunderbolt-in-hand") is a synonym of
    *[vajirapāṇi]{lang="sa"}* ([DN
    3:1.21.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.21.3), [MN
    35:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#14.1)). It is a
    frequent epithet of Sakka in the Vedas (eg. Rig Veda 1.173.10a
    *indro vajrahastaḥ*), an identification confirmed by the commentary
    here.

[^725]: [Vāsava]{lang="sa"} is another epithet of Sakka (see below, [DN
    20:14.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#14.9)), meaning
    "endowed with wealth" (*vasu*; see for example Rig Veda 1.9.9a
    *[indraṁ]{lang="sa"} [vasupatiṁ]{lang="sa"}* "Indra, lord of
    wealth"). The Buddhist explanation of his name [SN
    11.13:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.13/en/sujato#9.1), rather,
    plays on the word *[āvasatha]{lang="sa"}* and calls him the "giver
    of a guesthouse". Later Brahmanical texts enumerated eight Vasus,
    with Indra as their lord, who are reckoned among the thirty-three.
    \| Sakka's wife is the demon (*asura*) princess [Sujā]{lang="sa"},
    daughter of Vepacitti, hence they are his "brothers", technically
    in-laws ([SN
    11.12:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.12/en/sujato#6.1)).

[^726]: The [Kālakañja]{lang="sa"} ("Blue-lotus") is said to be the
    lowest class of demons ([DN
    24:1.7.19](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#1.7.19)).

[^727]: The [Dānavas]{lang="sa"} are a prominent group of *asuras*
    otherwise unattested in early Pali. The name stems from "rivers,
    waters" after their mother [Danū]{lang="sa"}. \| Ghasa ("devourer")
    is occasionally mentioned as the name of a *[rakṣasa]{lang="sa"}*
    ([Rāmāyaṇa]{lang="sa"} 5.22.36a *[praghasā]{lang="sa"}
    [nāma]{lang="sa"} [rākṣasī]{lang="sa"}*). The commentary treats them
    as a single class of arrow-wielding *asuras*.

[^728]: Vepacitti means "wise thinker", Sucitti means "good thinker".
    Vepacitti was the lord of the *asuras* and Sakka's counterpart.
    Their relationship was complicated ([SN
    11.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.23/en/sujato)). Brahmanical
    literature regards him as the eldest son of [Danū]{lang="sa"} and
    hence chief of the [Dānavas]{lang="sa"}. The Sanskrit form is
    *vipracitti*, but in Buddhist texts it is incorrectly Sanskritized
    to *vemacitra*. Vepacitti's fame matches Sucitti's obscurity, for he
    does not seem to appear elsewhere.

[^729]: [Pahārāda]{lang="sa"} the ocean-loving *asura* lord appears in
    [AN 8.19](https://suttacentral.net/an8.19/en/sujato). His name
    (Sanskrit *[prahlāda]{lang="sa"}*) means "mirth". Later Brahmanical
    legends say he was a righteous son of the wicked
    [Hiraṇyakaśipu]{lang="sa"}, who hated him for his devotion to
    [Viṣṇu]{lang="sa"}. \| The story goes that when Namuci stole the
    soma from Indra, Indra's vengeance was frustrated by his vow not to
    harm him with anything wet or dry, in the dark or the light
    (Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 12.7.3.1). Indra's ingenious
    solution was to dismember him with foam (Rig Veda 8.14.13) at dawn.
    Namuci's name is explained as *na-muci*, "not letting go" (the
    waters). In Buddhism, Namuci is a name of [Māra]{lang="sa"},
    although here [Māra]{lang="sa"} appears separately below..

[^730]: According to legend, Bali was the grandson of
    [Pahārāda]{lang="sa"} and son of Virocana. His hundred sons were
    dread warriors ([Bhāgavata]{lang="sa"} [Purāṇa]{lang="sa"} 8.10.30).
    The word *bali* also refers to a kind of sacrificial offering, but
    the roots of the term are obscure.

[^731]: *Virocana* was their grandfather. He was another adversary of
    Indra, despite which they were both said to have sought knowledge
    from [Prajāpatī]{lang="sa"}, but Virocana misunderstood since he saw
    only the surface meaning ([Chāndogya]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 8.7.2--8.5). Here he is associated with
    [Rāhu]{lang="sa"}, while [Gaṇeśa]{lang="sa"} [Purāṇa]{lang="sa"}
    2.29 says he was granted a crown by the sun which he then lost.
    These details hint at a connection with the eclipse, in which case
    *virocana* would be the rays that emanate during a solar eclipse.

[^732]: [Rāhu]{lang="sa"} is the mighty *asura* who "seizes" the moon
    ([SN 2.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.9/en/sujato)) or the sun ([SN
    2.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.10/en/sujato)) to create an
    eclipse. He is the son of Vepacitti.

[^733]: These four are normally treated in the suttas as physical
    properties. Each of them is worshiped in the Rig Veda as a deity,
    and the Upanishads list them together along with other elements (eg.
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.4.5). I am not
    aware of any earlier contexts that group the four together
    systematically as deities in this way.

[^734]: [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} is invoked frequently in the Vedas, and in
    the suttas he is associated with other leading deities such as Indra
    and Soma ([DN
    13:25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#25.2), [DN
    32:10.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#10.2), [SN
    11.3:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.3/en/sujato#5.1)). As one of
    the twelve children of Aditi he stood for a calendar month, and grew
    a wide and sometimes baffling array of associations---the oceans,
    water, the sky (at night), and justice. Vedic [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"}
    was the god of command, the king of tough rule. He was identified
    with the aristocrats, while his partner Mitra was the brahmins
    (Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 4.1.4).

[^735]: *Soma* is the divine nectar that filled the ancient
    proto-Indo-Europeans with vitality. Its biological identity is
    disputed, but may have been ephedra. It is associated with the moon,
    hence the connection with [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} as the night sky. \|
    *Yasa* means "fame, glory"; so far as I know it is not personified
    in early Brahmanical texts, and rarely later. The connection between
    these two is illuminated by such passages as Rig Veda 7.85.3. To
    uphold Indra and [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} in battle, there is an offering
    of Soma, which is described as *[svayaśasaḥ]{lang="sa"}*,
    "Self-Glorious", i.e. the state of being high on speed, if speed
    were a god.

[^736]: In the Vedas, Mitra ("friend") is almost always paired with
    [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"}, and the appearance of [Mettā]{lang="sa"}
    ("friendliness") here echoes that closeness. He was the god of
    alliances. \| *[Karuṇā]{lang="sa"}* in the sense of "compassion"
    does not occur at all in pre-Buddhist Sanskrit. It is probably
    introduced here as companion to [Mettā]{lang="sa"} by association
    with Mitra. The Sanskrit here, however, is *[maitrī]{lang="sa"}
    [varuṇikā]{lang="sa"}*. From a Buddhist point of view, these are
    deities reborn due to the development of *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* based
    on love and compassion.

[^737]: [Veṇhu]{lang="sa"} (variant *[veṇḍu]{lang="sa"}*) is the Pali
    spelling of Sanskrit *[viṣṇu]{lang="sa"}*, who appears only here and
    at [SN 2.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.12/en/sujato). In the Rig
    Veda he was a solar god who made three great strides (said to
    encompass the earth, the sky, and the heavens). \| A deity named
    [Sahalī]{lang="sa"} ("with plow") appears at [SN
    2.30:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.30/en/sujato#3.1) where he
    praises Makkhali [Gosāla]{lang="sa"}, but I cannot trace him
    anywhere else.

[^738]: *Yama* often refers to a god who guards the paths to the land of
    the dead ([SN
    1.33:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.33/en/sujato#10.3), [MN
    130:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn130/en/sujato#5.1)), lord of the
    [Yāma]{lang="sa"} gods. Here, however, it refers to "twins" who in
    the Vedas are often identified with the [Aśvins]{lang="sa"} (the
    twin horses yoked to the chariot). In the Vedas, it seems *asama*
    ("unequalled") is used as an epithet only, although the commentary
    says it is a name. \| In Pali these lines lack a verb, while the
    Sanskrit supplies *[āgataś]{lang="sa"}* ("come") instead of
    *[asamā]{lang="sa"}*, so perhaps we should read "the pair of Twins
    came".

[^739]: [Vāsava]{lang="sa"} is above at [DN
    20:12.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#12.3).

[^740]: *Purandara* ("Fortbreaker") is another epithet of Sakka or Indra
    (eg. Rig Veda 1.102.7). The Buddha reforms it to *Purindada*
    ("Firstgiver") at [SN
    11.12:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.12/en/sujato#2.1). But
    Indra's generosity is long renowned, eg. Rig Veda 1.10.6c: "He is
    the able one, and he will be able for us---Indra who distributes the
    goods" (*sa [śakra]{lang="sa"} uta naḥ [śakad]{lang="sa"} indro vasu
    [dayamānaḥ]{lang="sa"}*).

[^741]: Sanskrit has *[sabhikā]{lang="sa"}*. Most of the deities in the
    following verses do not seem to be met with elsewhere. The Sanskrit
    forms are often quite different but equally untraceable.

[^742]: Their names might mean "Unhurt" and "Hurter". The Sanskrit
    implausibly has *[romā]{lang="sa"}* ("Romans").

[^743]: For [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} see above ([DN
    20:13.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#13.3)). \|
    Sahadhamma means "who share the same duty".

[^744]: The "Unfallen" and the "Unshakeable".

[^745]: The [Sūleyyas]{lang="sa"} might be "spear (or trident) bearers";
    *[śūli]{lang="sa"}* is a name of Shiva. \| Rucira means "brilliant,
    beautiful".

[^746]: *[Vāsavanesi]{lang="sa"}* means "seekers of
    [Vāsava]{lang="sa"}".

[^747]: "Equals" and "Great Equals".

[^748]: "Humans" and "Superhumans", but here perhaps "Descendants of
    Manu".

[^749]: As per [DN
    1:2.7.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.7.2).

[^750]: [DN 12.10.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn12.10.2/en/sujato).

[^751]: *Hari* means "yellow, green" and is the astrological color of
    the planet *budha* ("Mercury"). It came to have the general meaning
    of "sacred, holy" and was an epithet for various deities, which in
    the Rig Veda included Indra and Vishnu. However the astrological
    connection is suggested by the references to Mars and Venus below.

[^752]: "Dwellers in the Red Place (= planet)", i.e. "Martians".

[^753]: *[Pāraga]{lang="sa"}* means "one who has crossed over".

[^754]: The deities seem to represent the three main lights that
    announce a new day: the morning star, the newborn sun, and the aura
    of the dawn. \| *Sukka* ("Bright") is the name of the planet Venus,
    the morning star. \| *[Aruṇa]{lang="sa"}* is the dawn, a major Vedic
    deity signifying the arising of consciousness and order. \|
    *Karambha* means "porridge", which was offered to the sun under the
    name [Pūṣan]{lang="sa"} (Rig Veda 3.52.7, 6.56.1; Śatapatha
    [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 4.2.5.22; [Kauṣītaki]{lang="sa"}
    [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 6.8.18; [Maitrāyaṇī]{lang="sa"}
    [Saṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 3.10.6). Hence he became known as
    *[karambhād]{lang="sa"}*, "porridge-eater". Apparently the sun lost
    its teeth and could only eat porridge (Śatapatha
    [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 1.7.4.8). Being toothless like a baby, and
    lacking the risen sun's "teeth" (i.e. "rays"), he probably
    represents the "newborn sun". Compare for example Rig Veda 10.35,
    where [Pūṣan]{lang="sa"} is invoked, along with many other deities,
    in a hymn to the dawn.

[^755]: [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} has *[veghanasā]{lang="sa"}*, for which
    the Buddha Jayanthi variant *vekhanasa* is preferable. We meet a
    wanderer of that name in [MN
    80](https://suttacentral.net/mn80/en/sujato), and in Sanskrit
    *[vaikhānasa]{lang="sa"}* is a general term for ascetics; but this
    meaning seems unlikely in context. The astrologer
    [Varāhamitra]{lang="sa"} names it a constellation
    ([Bṛhat]{lang="sa"}-[saṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 47.62), but that is much
    later. The Sanskrit here is *[nīlakavāsinī]{lang="sa"}* ("Dwellers
    in the Blue"), which pairs well with *[lohitavāsino]{lang="sa"}*
    above. *[Nīlavāsa]{lang="sa"}* is a name for Saturn, whose color is
    blue.

[^756]: *[Odātagayha]{lang="sa"}* is probably "white planet", i.e. the
    sun. Sanskrit has *[avadātakeśā]{lang="sa"}* ("white-haired").
    Compare the description of solar gods [Sūrya]{lang="sa"} at Rig Veda
    1.50.8 as *[śociṣkeśaṁ]{lang="sa"} [vicakṣaṇa]{lang="sa"}*
    ("flame-haired, brilliant") and [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} at Rig Veda
    8.41.9 as *[śvetā]{lang="sa"} [vicakṣaṇā]{lang="sa"}* ("white,
    brilliant").

[^757]: Sanskrit has *[pītakavāsinī]{lang="sa"}*, "dwellers in the
    yellow", either Mercury or Jupiter.

[^758]: The *[sadāmatta]{lang="sa"}* ("everdrunk") gods appear in some
    later Buddhist texts, alongside the *[māyādharas]{lang="sa"}* (or
    *[mālādharas]{lang="sa"}*), but they don't seem to appear in a Vedic
    context. \| I cannot find any reference to the
    *[hāragaja]{lang="sa"}* gods. Sanskrit has *[hāritakā]{lang="sa"}*,
    perhaps "sons of [Harītī]{lang="sa"}" (the *[yakkhinī]{lang="sa"}*;
    but see below, [DN
    20:20.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#20.12)).

[^759]: "Assorted" is *missaka*, not elsewhere attested as a name of
    gods.

[^760]: Pajjuna (Sanskrit *parjanya*) is a Vedic god of thunderstorms
    closely associated with Indra/Sakka. His daughters appear in [SN
    1.39](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.39/en/sujato) and [SN
    1.40](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.40/en/sujato). Sanskrit has
    instead *[śuddhakā]{lang="sa"} [rucikā]{lang="sa"}* ("pure,
    bright").

[^761]: The gods of Tusita and Yama are normal parts of the Buddhist
    cosmology. Neither *khemiya* nor the Sanskrit *[kṣemaka]{lang="sa"}*
    appear to be the names of gods elsewhere, and the commentary
    explains that they dwell in both the Tusita and Yama realms.

[^762]: The commentary acknowledges the variant readings
    *[kaṭṭhakā]{lang="sa"}* (from "stick" or "plowed") and
    *[kathakā]{lang="sa"}* ("reciters"), while Sanskrit has
    *[kṛṣṇuktāś]{lang="sa"}* ("reciters of the black"). Perhaps related
    to Sanskrit *[kāṭhaka]{lang="sa"}*, a recension of the Black Yajur
    Veda taught by the sage [Kaṭha]{lang="sa"}.

[^763]: Perhaps from *lamba* ("hang, droop") in reference to deities of
    the sunset (cp. [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"} 4.31.4c *[sūrye]{lang="sa"}
    vilambati*). Sanskrit has *[lumbinī]{lang="sa"}
    [lumbinīśreṣṭhā]{lang="sa"}*, which is perhaps normalized to mean
    "of [Lumbinī]{lang="sa"}".

[^764]: "Shining" (*joti*) is used widely of many gods, including the
    Sun and Indra. \| The commentary derives *[āsavā]{lang="sa"}* from
    *[āsa]{lang="sa"}* ("wish") not *[āsava]{lang="sa"}* ("defilement"),
    explaining that they achieved their status due to desire
    (*chandavasena*). This agrees with the Sanskrit
    *[svāśiṣā]{lang="sa"}* ("well-wish, prayer"), i.e. words of wishing
    or blessing uttered over the sacrifice (see Rig Veda 10.44.5; cp.
    8.44.23). This is a case where using the Pali in a translation would
    be actively misleading.

[^765]: *[Pavuṭṭha]{lang="sa"}* ("shed"), from *pavasati* ("stay away"),
    seems to be unique in the Pali in this sense. Commentary glosses
    *vigata*, "disappeared". \| The first part of this verse, according
    to the commentary, addresses the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} as a group in
    the singular, but I translate in plural for clarity.

[^766]: [Subrahmā]{lang="sa"} appears at [SN
    2.17](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.17/en/sujato) and [SN
    6.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.6/en/sujato). \| Paramatta appears
    only here in Pali. In Brahmanical texts it is a common term for the
    highest conception of [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} as the "supreme soul"
    (*[paramātman]{lang="sa"}*) of the cosmos. This term came into
    common usage later, but is found occasionally in earlier texts such
    as [Maitrāyaṇī]{lang="sa"} [Saṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 2.9.1.

[^767]: [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} makes regular guest appearances in the
    suttas ([DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato), [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato), [DN
    19](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato), [DN
    27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato), [SN
    6.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.11/en/sujato), [AN
    11.10](https://suttacentral.net/an11.10/en/sujato)). \| Tissa is a
    common name, meaning "born under the star Sirius". Perhaps this is
    the former monk of that name who was reborn in the
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm ([AN
    6.34](https://suttacentral.net/an6.34/en/sujato)).

[^768]: The moniker "Great [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}"
    (*[mahābrahmā]{lang="sa"}*) is here used of an individual, but
    sometimes it is a class of leading [Brahmās]{lang="sa"}.

[^769]: "God Almighty" (*issara*) is a [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} god to whom
    the creation of the world is falsely attributed ([DN
    24:2.14.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#2.14.3), [MN
    101:22.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn101/en/sujato#22.5), [AN
    3.61:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61/en/sujato#1.6)).

[^770]: Sanskrit has *[hāritī]{lang="sa"}*, the name of the fabled
    *[yakkhiṇī]{lang="sa"}* of [Madhurā]{lang="sa"} converted by the
    Buddha.

[^771]: This late sutta exhibits considerable literary sophistication.
    The A-plot concerns Sakka's rejection of his violent past and
    embrace of the Dhamma, while the B-plot concerns
    [Pañcasikkha]{lang="sa"}'s more modest growth from a libertine to a
    married man. \| This discourse is quoted by name and a passage
    discussed at [SN 22.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.4/en/sujato).
    In addition, the dialogue at [MN
    37](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato) picks up directly where
    this leaves off and may be considered a sequel. A Sanskrit parallel
    published by Ernst Waldschmidt in 1979 is available on SuttaCentral
    as [SF 241](https://suttacentral.net/sf241/san/waldschmidt). A
    different discourse of the same name is found at [SN
    35.118](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.118/en/sujato).

[^772]: Rhys Davids follows the commentary in translating this "the cave
    of Indra's [Sāl]{lang="sa"} Tree". However the Sanskrit
    *[yāvacchailaguhāyām]{lang="sa"}* supports "hill cave".

[^773]: Introduced in a minor role in [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato), [DN
    19](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato), and [DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato),
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} gets his moment to shine in this sutta.
    Outside of the [Dīghanikāya]{lang="sa"}, he appears only in [SN
    35.119](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.119/en/sujato). His name means
    "Fivecrest", evidently in reference to his impressive hairdo; a
    nymph or group of nymphs bore the synonymous name
    [Pañcacūḍā]{lang="sa"}, "Five Topknots". The centaur (*gandhabba*)
    was a wild rogue of music, dancing, and sex. He must be tamed, and
    here this is achieved through the power of love and filial respect.
    A less diplomatic approach is taken in Atharvaveda 4.37.7, where the
    *gandharva* with his "egg-crest" (*[śikhaṇḍino]{lang="sa"}*) is
    threatened with castration.

[^774]: The "arched harp" (*[vīṇa]{lang="sa"}*) was a multi-stringed
    instrument held in the lap, with the strings attached across a
    curved open arch or bow. It is not the modern Indian instrument
    called veena, which is a lute or stick zither. *Gandhabbas* are
    closely associated with music. [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s harp is described
    in the same way ([SN
    4.23:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.23/en/sujato#10.7)), and
    tradition says they were in fact the same instrument.

[^775]: In the Buddhist hierarchy of divinity, *gandhabbas* occupy a
    more humble place than the gods of the thirty-three, yet here
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} appears with them in a position of honor. In
    [DN 19:28.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#28.3) we saw
    that the even more exalted [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} takes the form of
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}. This fluidity is characteristic of old
    Vedic cosmology, where there is no clear hierarchy of divinity. The
    formalized hierarchies in Buddhism and Hinduism are a later
    conception.

[^776]: We will learn later of how Sakka's appearance could be too
    disturbing for the Buddha while on retreat ([DN
    21:1.10.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.10.13)).
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, on the other hand, would appear alone,
    without a retinue. Note, however, that on subsequent occasions Sakka
    showed no such reticence, either because he was already a
    stream-enterer or because the Buddha was not in solitary retreat.

[^777]: The idea that the Buddha would be wooed by a love song seems
    like an absurd conceit, until you take into account the centaurs'
    dangerous reputation as inveterate lechers. [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}
    wants to show that he is maturing and finally seeking a commitment
    in a respectable marriage.

[^778]: [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"} ("Sunshine") accords with the Vedic
    conception of the wife as the Sun ([Sūryā]{lang="sa"}, Rig Veda
    10.85) who takes as husband Soma, the moon. She appears in
    Atharvaveda 8.10.27, which invokes the *gandharvas* with their
    female counterpart the "nymphs" (Pali *[accharā]{lang="sa"}*,
    Sanskrit *[āpsarásā]{lang="sa"}*).

[^779]: In Sanskrit literature, Timbaru (Sanskrit *tumburu*) was an
    elder *gandharva* musician in the courts of Indra and Kuvera.
    According to [Rāmāyaṇa]{lang="sa"} 3.4, he was cursed with a
    monstrous form by Kuvera due to an inappropriate lust for the nymph
    [Rambhā]{lang="sa"}. Upon his defeat at the hands of
    [Rāma]{lang="sa"} he was restored to his former status.
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} would have wanted to avoid a similar fate.
    Rather than [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}, the Sanskrit literature
    mentions his daughters [Manuvantī]{lang="sa"} and
    [Sukeśī]{lang="sa"} ([Vāyupurāṇa]{lang="sa"} 69.49 =
    [Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa]{lang="sa"} 2.7.13).

[^780]: *[Aṅgīrasi]{lang="sa"}* means "shining one" and is
    etymologically linked with *agni* ("fire").
    [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"} earned the name due to both her radiant
    nature and her family connections: her father Timbaru was a son of
    [Kaśyapa]{lang="sa"}, who was (according to certain lineages)
    brother of [Aṅgīras]{lang="sa"}, from whom the
    [Aṅgīrasas]{lang="sa"} were descended. In the Arthavaveda---the only
    early non-Buddhist source for a nymph named
    [Suriyavaccasā]{lang="sa"}---*[aṅgīrasi]{lang="sa"}* is associated
    with witchcraft (Atharvaveda 12.5.52). *[Aṅgīrasa]{lang="sa"}* is
    also a patronymic of the Buddha ([DN
    32:3.14](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#3.14)).

[^781]: "Saints" is *[arahantā]{lang="sa"}*, which I normally translate
    as "perfected ones".

[^782]: *[Parinibbāpaya]{lang="sa"}*, "please quench me".
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} subverts imagery employed by the
    Buddha---quenching thirst, cooling breezes, extinguished flames---to
    erotic effect.

[^783]: [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} is showing off his literary skill. The
    same image, the elephant, illustrates opposing qualities, peaceful
    and violent. In these two sides of sensual desire, he reveals,
    unconsciously perhaps, the rapacious side of his own nature. For
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"}, the elephant bursting its bonds illustrates
    his crazed devotion, whereas later it illustrates breaking free of
    desire ([DN
    21:1.12.45](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.12.45)).

[^784]: For how a married couple may stay together in this life and the
    next, see [AN 4.55](https://suttacentral.net/an4.55/en/sujato).

[^785]: [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} is using the present participle
    *[jigīsāno]{lang="sa"}* in the historical present.

[^786]: In Indian culture, a *gandharva* wedding is a pure love-match,
    without the blessing of parents or priests. Here, however,
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} wants to do the right thing and get the
    father's blessing.

[^787]: If [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} was seeking the Buddha's approval for
    his love-match, he was doomed to disappointment, as the Buddha and
    his mendicants do not involve themselves in arranging marriages. The
    Buddha sidesteps the issue by politely complementing
    [Pañcasikha]{lang="sa"} on his musicianship.

[^788]: "When did you compose" is also at [MN
    56:30.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#30.1).

[^789]: "Sister" (*[bhaginī]{lang="sa"}*) is a respectful term of
    address, but is normally used in a chaste sense. When
    [Raṭṭhapāla]{lang="sa"} calls his wives "sister", they faint in
    shock ([MN 82:23.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn82/en/sujato#23.4)).

[^790]: [Sikhaṇḍī]{lang="sa"} ("egg-crested") is the term for the
    centaur as seductive threat to women in Atharvaveda 4.37.7. It is
    also a poetic term for a peacock.

[^791]: It is rare for the Buddha to address a deity as "venerable"
    (*[āyasmā]{lang="sa"}*), a term usually reserved for monks.
    [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"} addresses Sakka as "the venerable Kosiya" at
    [MN 37:10.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#10.6);
    [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"} calls him Kosiya without honorific at [Ud
    3.7:3.12](https://suttacentral.net/ud3.7/en/sujato#3.12). \| The
    word *kosiya* is explained by the commentaries as "owl", which, if
    correct, would have been the totem for a clan of that name. It is,
    however, a patronymic: Rig Veda 1.10.11 has *indra
    [kauśika]{lang="sa"}* which means "Indra, son of [Kuśika]{lang="sa"}
    (or [Kuśa]{lang="sa"})". *[Kuśa]{lang="sa"}* grass is critical to
    the performance of Vedic rites, and the label probably initially
    implied "Brahmanized", i.e. a king whose reign was authorized
    according to Vedic ritual. Kosiya is said to be a low class family
    name ([Bu Pc
    2:2.1.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc2/en/sujato#2.1.18)).

[^792]: A *[paricārikā]{lang="sa"}* is a maid attending on a nymph ([MN
    37:8.12](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#8.12)). \|
    [Bhūjati]{lang="sa"} (variant *[bhuñjatī]{lang="sa"}*) does not seem
    to appear elsewhere.

[^793]: Sakka pointedly ignores this, but perhaps his shame at
    disturbing the Buddha's meditation explains his oblique method of
    gaining an audience.

[^794]: This implies she was a stream-enterer.

[^795]: In Buddhism, sex is mutable between lives and even within one
    life ([Bu Pj
    1:10.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#10.6.1)).
    Later Buddhists sometimes held that the status of a male was
    preferable. Here this is not stated outright, but the narrative
    implies that she thought her station was improved when becoming a
    male. Notably, it is not the Buddha who says this, but Sakka,
    relaying the story of another deity. That the proponent was a woman,
    at least formerly, is a trope of Indian literature: a woman is the
    ideal misogynist (see eg. [Ja
    61](https://suttacentral.net/ja61/en/sujato) or
    [Śivapurāna]{lang="sa"} chapter 4). Here, though, the situation is
    nuanced, because despite her (presumed) inferior status, she has
    better rebirth than the monks she served.

[^796]: The realm of centaurs is "inferior" because the centaurs are
    known for their ribald sexuality.

[^797]: *[Kutomukhā]{lang="sa"}*, which occurs only in this sutta,
    contrasts with *[sammukhā]{lang="sa"}* ("in the presence of", "from
    the mouth of"). The commentary explains it as a rhetorical question,
    "Were you distracted or falling asleep?" Alternatively, it might
    mean "From whom did you learn the Buddha's teaching?" It recurs
    later in the verses. This is not the only such case:
    *[duddiṭṭharūpaṁ]{lang="sa"}* and *[kāyaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [brahmapurohitaṁ]{lang="sa"}* are other examples of terms found
    nowhere else in the Pali canon, yet found here both in prose and in
    verse. Clearly one has been copied from the other; it seems to me
    that the rarity of these terms and the greater coherence of the
    verses suggests that the prose is a (somewhat altered) summary of
    the verses.

[^798]: The commentary explains the verb "gained"
    (*[paṭilabhiṁsu]{lang="sa"}*) as serving dual roles here: "gaining"
    of "absorption mindfulness" (*[jhānasatiṁ]{lang="sa"}*), upon which
    they "gain" rebirth in the [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm. However, the
    verses below speak of "recollecting" (*[anussaraṁ]{lang="sa"}*) the
    Buddha's teachings at this juncture. Compare [Bu NP
    23:1.1.20](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-np23/en/sujato#1.1.20),
    where the king "remembered" his long-forgotten promise
    (*[vissaritvā]{lang="sa"} cirena [satiṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [paṭilabhitvā]{lang="sa"}*). [AN
    4.191:2.24](https://suttacentral.net/an4.191/en/sujato#2.24) speaks
    of the "arising of memory" (*[satuppādo]{lang="sa"}*) in a deity
    when reminded of Dhamma passages they once recited as a monk. \| The
    phrase *[kāyaṁ]{lang="sa"} [brahmapurohitaṁ]{lang="sa"}* is
    syntactically incongruous; I think it was clumsily copied from the
    verses below, where the required verb (*[ajjhagaṁsu]{lang="sa"}*) is
    present. The commentary explains it as "a Minister of
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}'s body" (*[brahmapurohitasarīraṁ]{lang="sa"}*),
    but in such contexts *[kāya]{lang="sa"}* usually means "host".

[^799]: When bowing, it is a special sign of devotion to touch the feet
    of the one revered (eg. [MN
    89:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn89/en/sujato#9.1)).

[^800]: Here Gopaka shifts from speaking about them in third person to
    speaking to them in second person.

[^801]: *Tidiva* is an abbreviated reference to the thirty-three gods.

[^802]: I.e. she was a lay person.

[^803]: Up until now, the verses have been spoken by Gopaka, but here a
    narrator appears.

[^804]: Normally rebirth is described as passing away in one realm then
    being reborn in another. Yet here the gods of the thirty-three---in
    their traditional abode on Mount Meru---were watching them literally
    fly from one realm to another.

[^805]: The truncated *janind'* is not vocative *janinda* for Sakka, but
    nominative *janindo* for the Buddha.

[^806]: "Sakyan Sage" (*sakyamuni*) became a favorite epithet of the
    Buddha, but in early texts it appears only here and the Ratanasutta
    ([Snp 2.1:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.1/en/sujato#4.2)).

[^807]: "Sons" in a spiritual sense.

[^808]: The commentary says, "In this dispensation the explanation of
    the teaching is such that because of it, disciples become endowed
    with such qualities" (*ettha [sāsane]{lang="sa"}
    [evarūpā]{lang="sa"} [dhammappakāsanā]{lang="sa"}, [yāya]{lang="sa"}
    [sāvakā]{lang="sa"} etehi [guṇehi]{lang="sa"}
    [samannāgatā]{lang="sa"} honti*). This explains the feminine
    *[etādisī]{lang="sa"}*; *[pakasanā]{lang="sa"}*, which is normally
    neuter, is feminine here. This use is fairly common in later texts
    (it occurs at the conclusion of the [Ṭīkā]{lang="sa"} for this
    sutta).

[^809]: *[Kiṅkaṅkhati]{lang="sa"}* is a unique term for "doubt".

[^810]: The end point of Gopaka's speech is hard to determine, as there
    is no *-ti* to mark it. Various editions and translations either
    ignore the issue or end it in different places. The next line marks
    the beginning of Sakka's direct speech to the Buddha, and I think it
    makes the best sense to assume that up to here he has been relating
    the story he was told.

[^811]: This question hints at Sakka's own evolution from the battlegod
    of the Vedas to an acolyte of peace.

[^812]: Jealousy is wanting what others have, while stinginess is not
    wanting to share what you have.

[^813]: Compare with such contexts as the side branch of dependent
    origination at [DN
    15:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#9.1), the origins of
    disputes at [Snp 4.11](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato),
    and the analysis of proliferation at [MN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/mn18/en/sujato). Note the constructive
    use of the "yes, and" method of questioning. Sakka finds wisdom due
    to his curiosity, neither being too-easily sated with a simple
    answer, nor quibbling that the answer is inadequate, but building on
    the foundations of understanding.

[^814]: Compare [Snp
    4.11:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#4.1).

[^815]: Here we depart from the normal sequence, which is that feelings
    give rise to craving (*[taṇhā]{lang="sa"}*). In [Snp
    4.11:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#6.1) it is said
    that pleasure and pain give rise to desire, not thought.

[^816]: "Judgments that emerge from the proliferation of perceptions"
    renders *[papañcasaññāsaṅkhā]{lang="sa"}*. Again the sequence
    departs from [MN
    18:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn18/en/sujato#16.1), which says
    that thoughts---which are normal and morally neutral psychological
    processes---give rise to "proliferation" (*[papañca]{lang="sa"}*),
    which is when craving and delusion cause thought to spin out of
    control. "Proliferation" then solidifies into "judgments" that fuel
    an individual's delusion of "self" persisting through time.

[^817]: *[Jaññā]{lang="sa"}* is 3rd singular optative (cp. [AN
    9.6:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/an9.6/en/sujato#3.4)).

[^818]: That is, second *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* is better than first
    *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*.

[^819]: Overwhelmingly, the suttas speak of happiness in the path to
    liberation. They do, however, also acknowledge that sometimes
    temporary states of sadness leading to disillusionment can spur a
    person on the path.

[^820]: It is hard to know what the text is getting at here, as there is
    no "sadness" in any *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*.

[^821]: Here the Buddha emphasizes the psychological and spiritual
    underpinnings of the "monastic code" (*[pātimokkha]{lang="sa"}*).

[^822]: The suttas frequently describe three kinds of search: for
    sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual path
    (eg. [SN
    45.161:7.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.161/en/sujato#7.3)). The
    last search led the Buddha to awakening ([MN
    26:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#15.1)).

[^823]: Sakka switches his term of address for the Buddha from
    *[mārisa]{lang="sa"}* to the more respectful *bhante* here, then
    back to *[mārisa]{lang="sa"}* below. This passage is found at [MN
    114:24.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn114/en/sujato#24.5), where
    *bhante* is used, suggesting it was imported from there.

[^824]: For a more detailed analysis of this, see [MN
    152](https://suttacentral.net/mn152/en/sujato).

[^825]: The Pali *ekanta* ("single") here is a little tricky; it could
    mean either "the same" or "of one goal". The Sanskrit has just *eka*
    (*[ekakāmā]{lang="sa"} [ekacchandāḥ]{lang="sa"}*, "one desire, one
    wish"), while the commentary explains the first and last terms as
    "one goal" and the middle terms as "one".

[^826]: The Buddha points out that spiritual teachers, when faced with a
    world of experiential diversity, tend to prioritize their own
    experience or doctrine, dismissing others as less real or
    meaningful.

[^827]: This is the final substantive question of the series. It is
    picked up in [MN
    37:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#2.2) where Sakka, in
    a subsequent visit, inquires further as to the nature of those who
    have realized the ultimate goal.

[^828]: "Turbulence" is *[ejā]{lang="sa"}*, from a root meaning "motion,
    agitation", and hence the opposite of the "imperturbable" (*aneja*)
    peace of the Buddha ([SN
    35.90](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.90/en/sujato)).

[^829]: Compare [Ajātasattu]{lang="sa"}'s experience at [DN
    2:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#15.1).

[^830]: "Nectar" is *[ojā]{lang="sa"}*, in Vedic texts called *soma* or
    *[amṛta]{lang="sa"}* ("ambrosia" of immortality). The battle over
    nectar by gods (*deva*) and demons (*asura*) is a very ancient
    element of Indo-European mythology.

[^831]: Here Sakka makes a clean break from the violent delights he
    enjoyed in former (Vedic) times.

[^832]: *[Punarāyu]{lang="sa"}* is a unique term. It probably means that
    Sakka can extend his current fortunate birth due to the merit of
    Dhamma.

[^833]: To die "unconfused" or "consciously" is said to be a benefit of
    Dhamma practice (eg. [AN
    5.215:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.215/en/sujato#2.3)).

[^834]: "According to method" (*[ñāyena]{lang="sa"}*) recalls
    *[ñāyapaṭipanno]{lang="sa"}* as a description of the noble ones. It
    means practicing according with the noble eightfold path, a "method"
    that yields definite results.

[^835]: This refers to the possibility of achieving perfection
    (*[arahattā]{lang="sa"}*).

[^836]: That is, after passing away as Sakka and being reborn as a
    human, he will subsequently return to the heaven realm.

[^837]: He predicts that his final life will be in this high realm that
    is inhabited by non-returners ([AN
    9.12:6.7](https://suttacentral.net/an9.12/en/sujato#6.7)).

[^838]: *Karomasi* is middle imperative 1st plural, "we should do",
    glossed by the commentary as "we should pay homage"
    (*[namakkāraṁ]{lang="sa"} karoma*).

[^839]: *[Samaṁ]{lang="sa"}* is an indeclinable in the sense "likewise".

[^840]: *[Sāmaṁ]{lang="sa"}* is an indeclinable in the sense "oneself,
    personally, one's own".

[^841]: A *gandharva* wedding must be a mutual love match.

[^842]: "Touching the ground with his hand" is a unique gesture in the
    early Pali, immortalized in later legend when the Buddha touches the
    ground to invoke the Earth Goddess as witness of his striving.

[^843]: Sakka is also said to have been accompanied by 80,000 deities at
    [SN 40.10:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn40.10/en/sujato#4.4). This
    is one of many indications that this is a late discourse, several of
    which have been touched on above: late or unique terminology; fancy
    literary styles; adoption of doctrinal passages from elsewhere in a
    sometimes clumsy fashion; and so on. In determining whether a sutta
    is late or early, we do not rely on a single definitive reason, but
    on a cluster of independent criteria which taken together are most
    easily explained in terms of historical development.

[^844]: This discourse is copied from [MN
    10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10/en/sujato). The section on the
    four noble truths has been expanded with material mostly drawn from
    [MN 141](https://suttacentral.net/mn141/en/sujato). These discourses
    are the most influential texts for modern Theravada meditation,
    prompting countless modern commentaries. Comparative study of the
    several parallel versions reveals that this discourse, while
    comprised almost entirely of early material, was compiled in this
    form as one of the latest texts in the Pali suttas. \| While
    mindfulness is always useful ([SN
    46.53:15.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.53/en/sujato#15.4)), the
    "establishment of mindfulness" (*[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}*) refers
    especially to a conscious development of contemplative practices
    based on mindfulness, i.e. "mindfulness meditation".

[^845]: The phrase *[ekāyano]{lang="sa"} maggo* ("path to convergence")
    is given multiple meanings in commentaries and ancient translations.
    Outside of *[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}*, it is used in only one
    context in Pali, where it means to "come together with" ([MN
    12:37.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#37.5)). At [SN
    47.18:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.18/en/sujato#3.4) the
    phrase is spoken by [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}, which suggests it was a
    Brahmanical term. At [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.4.11---a passage full of details shared with
    the suttas---it means a place where things unite or converge. Thus
    *[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}* leads to everything "coming together as
    one". In other words, as seventh factor of the noble eightfold path,
    it leads to *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}*, the eighth factor ([SN
    45.1:3.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.1/en/sujato#3.9); see also
    [MN 44:12.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#12.3)).

[^846]: The idiom *[kāye]{lang="sa"} [kāyānupassī]{lang="sa"}*,
    literally "observes a body in the body" refers to focusing on a
    specific aspect of embodied experience, such as the breath, the
    postures, etc. \| "Keen" (or "ardent", *[ātāpī]{lang="sa"}*) implies
    effort, while "aware" (*[sampajāno]{lang="sa"}*) is the wisdom of
    understanding situation and context. \| "Covetousness and
    displeasure" (*[abhijjhādomanassaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) are the strong
    forms of desire and aversion that are overcome by sense restraint in
    preparation for meditation.

[^847]: "Feelings" (*[vedanā]{lang="sa"}*) are the basic tones of
    pleasant, painful, or neutral, not the complexes we call "emotions".

[^848]: "Mind" (*citta*) is simple awareness. In meditation contexts,
    "mind" is often similar in meaning to *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}*.

[^849]: "Principles" (*[dhammā]{lang="sa"}*) are the natural "systems"
    of cause and effect that underlie the "teachings". The renderings
    "mind objects" or "mental qualities" are incorrect, as many of the
    things spoken of in this section are neither mind objects nor mental
    qualities. "Phenomena" is a possible translation, but the emphasis
    is not on the "appearance" of things, but on the "principles"
    governing their conditional relations.

[^850]: The context here---a mendicant gone to the forest---establishes
    that this practice takes place in the wider context of the Gradual
    Training. Indeed, this whole sutta can be understood as an expansion
    of this phrase, mentioned briefly at [DN
    2:67.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#67.3).

[^851]: The most fundamental meditation instruction in Buddhism. Notice
    how the Buddha phrases it: not "concentrate on the breath" as an
    object, but rather "breathing" as an activity to which one brings
    mindfulness.

[^852]: The stages of breath meditation are not meant to be done
    deliberately, but to be observed and understood as the natural
    process of deepening meditation. When starting out, the breath is
    somewhat rough and coarse.

[^853]: Over time, the breath becomes more subtle and soft.

[^854]: Contextually the idiom "whole body" (*[sabbakāya]{lang="sa"}*)
    here refers to the breath, marking the fuller and more continuous
    awareness that arises with tranquility. Some practitioners, however,
    interpret it as the "whole physical body", broadening awareness to
    encompass the movement and settling of energies throughout the body.

[^855]: The "physical process" (*[kāyasaṅkhāraṁ]{lang="sa"}*) is the
    breath ([SN
    41.6:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.6/en/sujato#1.8)).

[^856]: Text has "long" and "short", but "deep" and "shallow" or "heavy"
    and "light" are more idiomatic for describing the breath in English.

[^857]: "Internally" is one's own body, "externally" the bodies of
    others, or external physical phenomena. This distinction is applied
    broadly in Buddhist meditation, but it is more relevant in some
    contexts than others. In the case of the breath, one is focusing on
    one's own breath, but when contemplating, say, a dead body, or the
    material elements, there is more of an external dimension. Starting
    with "me" in here and the "world" out there, this practice dissolves
    this distinction so that we see we are of the same nature as
    everything else.

[^858]: This is the *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* ("insight" or
    "discernment") dimension of meditation, observing not just the rise
    and fall of phenomena, but also their conditioned "nature" as being
    "liable" (*-dhamma*) to impermanence. The meaning of this passage is
    explained at ([SN
    47.42](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.42/en/sujato)). Apart from
    these passages, *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* in
    *[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}* pertains specially to the observation of
    principles.

[^859]: Mindfulness meditation leads to a range of knowledges as
    detailed by Anuruddha at [SN
    52.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.6/en/sujato) and [SN
    52.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.11/en/sujato)--24. An arahant
    is "independent" of any attachment (eg. [MN
    143](https://suttacentral.net/mn143/en/sujato)), but
    *[satipaṭṭhāna]{lang="sa"}* is also taught to give up dependency on
    views of the past and future ([DN
    29:40.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#40.1)).

[^860]: In early Pali, this practice is found only in the two
    [Satipaṭṭhānasuttas]{lang="sa"} and the closely related
    [Kāyagatāsatisutta]{lang="sa"} ([MN
    119](https://suttacentral.net/mn119/en/sujato)). It is practiced by
    developing a reflexive awareness of one's posture and activity as it
    proceeds, often assisted by moving slowly and carefully.

[^861]: "Situational awareness" (*[sampajañña]{lang="sa"}*) understands
    the context and purpose of activities. The main examples here
    illustrate the activities of daily monastic life: leaving the
    monastery on almsround, restraint while in the town, care wearing
    the robes, then mindfully eating and going to the toilet.

[^862]: This practice is intended to counter sexual desire and
    obsession. The primary focus is on one's own body, rather than
    another's body, although that can be brought in also. By focusing on
    aspects of our body that we normally prefer to ignore, we move
    towards a healthy sense of acceptance and neutrality towards our
    body.

[^863]: Thirty-one parts are mentioned in early texts, later expanded to
    thirty-two with the addition of the "brain"
    (*[matthaluṅga]{lang="sa"}*).

[^864]: The "bag with openings at both ends" is the body. Not all the
    varieties of grains and beans can be positively identified.

[^865]: While meditation on the elements is commonly taught in early
    texts, this phrase is found only in the two
    [Satipaṭṭhānasuttas]{lang="sa"} and the
    [Kāyagatāsatisutta]{lang="sa"}. Detailed instructions are found in
    such suttas as [MN 28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato) and
    [MN 140](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato). This meditation
    works in any posture, whereas breath meditation is best done
    sitting, to allow the breath to become still.

[^866]: The "elements" are the four states of matter as represented by
    their primary material example and their dominant property: earth as
    a solid with the property of resisting or upholding; water as a
    liquid with the property of binding; air as a gas with the property
    of movement; and fire ("heat" or "energy") as plasma with the
    property of transformation.

[^867]: This gruesome image shows that butchery of cows was a normal
    feature of ancient Indian life.

[^868]: Cremation was expensive and not available to everyone. Bodies
    might be left in the charnel ground for a variety of reasons, such
    as local customs, lack of funds, or in cases of inauspicious death
    such as murder or execution. This is still seen in some places
    today, and monastics occasionally take the opportunity to practice
    meditation beside a corpse. However the wording of the Pali sounds
    like an imaginative exercise.

[^869]: The observed corpse is not gendered. The purpose is not to
    become repulsed by an objectified other, but to understand the
    mortality of one's own body.

[^870]: It takes decades for bones to rot to powder, again suggesting it
    is an imaginative contemplation.

[^871]: Literally "a feeling among the feelings"; the practice shows
    that the meditator contemplates specific feelings as they occur.

[^872]: Pali employs direct quotes to indicate reflexive awareness: you
    feel the feeling and you know that you feel the feeling. It does not
    mean that you have to literally say "I feel a pleasant feeling",
    although some adopt that as a meditation method.

[^873]: Feelings "of the flesh" (*[sāmisa]{lang="sa"}*) are associated
    with the body and sensual desires ([SN
    36.31:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#4.1)).

[^874]: Feelings "not of the flesh" (*[nirāmisa]{lang="sa"}*) are
    associated with renunciation and especially with the
    *[jhānas]{lang="sa"}* and liberation ([SN
    36.31:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#5.1)).

[^875]: This would include the feelings of loss, doubt, and dejection
    that can occur during the spiritual path (see [MN
    44:28.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#28.6)).

[^876]: The feeling of the fourth *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* and higher
    liberations ([SN
    36.31:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#8.2)).

[^877]: In Buddhist theory, awareness of the presence or absence of
    qualities such as greed is explained on three levels. There is the
    simple happenstance of whether greed is present at that time or not.
    Then there is the mind freed of greed through the power of
    absorption. Finally there is the liberation from greed which comes
    with full awakening.

[^878]: The mind is "constricted internally" due to dullness and
    "scattered externally" due to the distractions of desire ([SN
    51.20:18.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn51.20/en/sujato#18.1)).

[^879]: The following terms "expansive" (*mahaggata*), "supreme"
    (*anuttara*), "immersed" (*[samāhita]{lang="sa"}*), and "freed"
    (*vimutta*) all refer to states of absorption and/or awakening.

[^880]: The [Satipaṭṭhānavibhaṅga]{lang="sa"} of the Pali Abhidhamma
    only mentions the hindrances and awakening factors in this section
    ([Vb 7](https://suttacentral.net/vb7)). This, together with a range
    of other evidence, suggests that this was the original content of
    the observation of principles.

[^881]: Here causality is introduced. In the contemplation of mind, the
    meditator was aware of the presence or absence of desire in the
    mind. Now they look deeper, investigating the cause of desire and
    understanding how to be free of it forever. This contemplation of
    the "principles" of cause and effect is the distinctive feature of
    this section.

[^882]: The Buddhist schools debated whether this included physical
    tiredness or not. The Theravada argued that it was purely a mental
    laziness, as even the Buddha got sleepy.

[^883]: "Form" (*[rūpa]{lang="sa"}*) is one's own body and the external
    material world experienced through the senses. More subtly, it
    represents the "appearance" of physical phenomena, even when
    experienced solely in the mind as color, visions, etc.

[^884]: "Perception" (*[saññā]{lang="sa"}*) is the recognition or
    interpretation of experience in terms of meaningful wholes. We see,
    for example, "color" yet we perceive a "person". In the Vinaya we
    find many examples where a person perceived things in one way, yet
    they turned out to be something else.

[^885]: In the five aggregates, *[saṅkhārā]{lang="sa"}* is a synonym for
    "volition" (*[cetanā]{lang="sa"}*). The traditions later used it as
    a catch-all category for everything that does not fit in the other
    aggregates. In the suttas, however, the purpose of the aggregates is
    not to classify everything that exists, but to contemplate aspects
    of experience that we tend to identify as a "self".

[^886]: At [SN
    35.232:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.232/en/sujato#3.2) the
    "fetter that arises dependent on both" is identified as "desire and
    lust" (*[chandarāga]{lang="sa"}*).

[^887]: These seven factors that lead to awakening
    (*[bojjhaṅgā]{lang="sa"}*, [SN
    46.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.5/en/sujato)) are commonly
    presented in opposition to the five hindrances (eg. [SN
    46.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.2/en/sujato), [SN
    46.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.23/en/sujato), [SN
    46.55](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.55/en/sujato)).

[^888]: "Mindfulness" includes the recollection of the teachings ([SN
    46.3:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.3/en/sujato#1.8)) as well as
    mindfulness meditation.

[^889]: Likewise, this includes the inquiry into *dhammas* as
    "teachings" as well as "phenomena" or "principles".

[^890]: Due to their development of the two wings of *samatha* and
    *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* meditation as described in this sutta,
    practised in the context of the teaching and training as a whole,
    the meditator realizes the four noble truths at the moment of
    stream-entry.

[^891]: The sutta now proceeds in analytical fashion, digging deeper
    into the details of the four noble truths. The fundamental
    definitions were taught in the Buddha's first sermon ([SN
    56.11:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#4.1)).

[^892]: As at [DN 15.4.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn15.4.3/en/sujato),
    *[jāti]{lang="sa"}* is invariably defined as the rebirth of beings,
    not as simple arising. The same applies to old age and death.

[^893]: In this and following definitions we mainly find mere verbal
    variations of the basic term.

[^894]: *Dukkha* ("pain", "suffering") is here restricted to physical
    pain. Elsewhere it may be any kind of painful feeling, while in the
    four noble truths it is suffering of any sort, including subtle
    forms of existential suffering.

[^895]: *Domanassa* normally means "sadness", but sometimes it contrasts
    with desire, in which case it is a form of aversion.

[^896]: *Piya* often refers to those who are dear and beloved, but as
    shown here it can also mean simply anything that is liked.

[^897]: This is an example of "painful feeling not of the flesh". The
    Buddha is here denying the efficacy of prayer, invocation, or magic
    spells.

[^898]: The following list of properties that relate to the senses
    gradually moves from the more basic to the more sophisticated.

[^899]: "Eye consciousness" is aware only of "light"; it sees colors but
    does not interpret them.

[^900]: "Contact" or "stimulus" happens when the sense base, the sense
    object, and the sense consciousness all occur together.

[^901]: "Perception" interprets the "light" that is seen, organizing it
    in meaningful wholes. For example, the eye sees the color white,
    while perception recognizes that it is "white", and further, that
    that white color is in fact a "wall".

[^902]: To continue the example, once the light has been interpreted by
    perception as a "wall", we then make the choice to walk around it
    rather than through it. Choices therefore depend on perceptions.

[^903]: "Thought" is *vitakka*.

[^904]: "Consideration" is *[vicāra]{lang="sa"}*, a more sustained
    exercize of thought.

[^905]: Mindfulness is not a path in and of itself, but rather is the
    seventh factor of the eightfold path.

[^906]: The fourth noble truth is the path, while the first path factor
    is the noble truths. These two teachings are different perspectives
    on the same *dhamma*.

[^907]: *[Saṅkappa]{lang="sa"}* is normally a synonym of *vitakka* in
    the suttas, hence the rendering "right thought". It is, however, not
    just verbalized thought, but the direction in which one applies the
    mind. This factor is the emotional counterpart of right view,
    ensuring that the path is motivated by love and compassion.

[^908]: The first three of the five precepts. "Sexual misconduct" is the
    betrayal of trust in a sexual relationship.

[^909]: Defined for a monastic in the long section on ethics in the
    [Sāmaññaphalasutta]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    2:56.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#56.1)) and for a lay
    person as trade in weapons, living creatures, meat, intoxicants, and
    poisons ([AN
    5.177:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.177/en/sujato#1.3)).

[^910]: The emphasis is on "develop in this way" (*[evaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [bhāveyya]{lang="sa"}*), that is, with the full practice including
    deep absorption as the culmination of the path as a whole.

[^911]: A similar promise of results in at most seven years is found at
    [DN 25:22.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato#22.9), [MN
    10:46.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn10/en/sujato#46.3), and [MN
    85:59.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn85/en/sujato#59.3); and at most
    ten years at [AN
    10.46:7.3](https://suttacentral.net/an10.46/en/sujato#7.3).

[^912]: [Kumārakassapa]{lang="sa"} was ordained at twenty ([Kd
    1:75.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#75.1.1)). He
    features in the Vammikasutta ([MN
    23](https://suttacentral.net/mn23/en/sujato)), and his verses are
    collected in the [Theragāthā]{lang="sa"} ([Thag
    2.41](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.41/en/sujato)). He was declared
    the foremost of those with brilliant speech ([AN
    1.217](https://suttacentral.net/an1.217/en/sujato)), apparently on
    the basis of this discourse. \| The [Pāyāsisuta]{lang="sa"} is the
    only major Buddhist text that has a Jain parallel,
    Paesi-[kahāṇayaṁ]{lang="sa"}, a similar dialogue between Paesi and
    [Keśin]{lang="sa"} in [Setavyā]{lang="sa"}.

[^913]: [Setavyā]{lang="sa"} was north-east of [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}.

[^914]: [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} was a *khattiya* yet he receives a
    *brahmadeyya*. The sense of *brahmadeyya* as a donation to brahmins
    is well attested in inscriptions, so I think this is likely a
    mistake in the text, rather than evidence that the practice was not
    for brahmins only.

[^915]: This is wrong view per [MN
    117:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn117/en/sujato#5.1).

[^916]: This idiom recurs at [AN
    6.38:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an6.38/en/sujato#1.5) where, as
    here, it refers to a well-known view and cannot mean that they have
    never heard of it. There the text and commentary read
    *[māhaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, which with the aorist is prohibitive not
    negatory. It is an idiom expressing dislike.

[^917]: While the world "down here" is bogged down in its messy and
    ephemeral issues, the heavenly bodies proceed in their serene,
    glorious, stately indifference. Ignoring gravity, self-luminous, and
    apparently eternal, they operate according to what appears to be an
    entirely different set of rules, a "meta-physics". What Newton did
    in physics the Buddha did in spirituality: show that the heavens,
    despite appearances, operate with the same set of conditioned rules
    as apply down here.

[^918]: Kassapa's argument here doesn't directly establish his
    conclusion. It is possible that gods exist on an entirely separate
    plane that has nothing to do with kamma and rebirth.

[^919]: This is still a major factor in shaping belief. People will
    reject the opinions of experts and believe people that they know.

[^920]: Compare [Jaiminīya]{lang="sa"} [Brāhmaņa]{lang="sa"} 1.42, where
    [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} asphyxiated his son [Bhṛgu]{lang="sa"} in order
    to send him on a journey to the "other world", inducing a near-death
    experience. [Bhṛgu]{lang="sa"} saw men cutting other men to pieces
    and eating them, and other sights both horrifying and beautiful, all
    the while wondering if what he saw was real, before his breath was
    returned to him.

[^921]: Follow PTS reading *[uddassetvā]{lang="sa"}*, which at [MN
    82:11.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn82/en/sujato#11.9) has the sense
    "visit".

[^922]: Kassapa, however, has not established the existence of an
    afterlife, he has merely refuted [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}'s argument. Per
    Occam's razor, the burden of proof lies on the one who wishes to
    establish the existence of the afterlife, not on the one who denies
    it. His arguments, however, become more persuasive if they are
    understood as building on the initial agreement on the divinity of
    the sun and moon. He knows that [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} accepts some
    form of other world, even if he says otherwise, so the argument
    hinges on whether [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}'s methods are sufficient to
    *disprove* the kind of other world that Kassapa proposes, i.e. one
    driven by kamma.

[^923]: Follow PTS reading *[ubbāhati]{lang="sa"}*. Cf. [AN
    3.93:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an3.93/en/sujato#6.4) for the
    sense "transport".

[^924]: 36,000,000 years.

[^925]: This recognizes the relativity of time.

[^926]: [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} makes a good point; he only relies on
    sources that he knows he can trust.

[^927]: Kassapa establishes the empirical method by which these truths
    are known. Science extends knowledge by means of external
    instruments, while meditation extends the scope of consciousness. A
    non-scientist cannot understand how a scientist establishes their
    conclusions, and can only rely on trust in the scientific
    establishment. Likewise a non-meditator cannot understand the
    capacity of expanded consciousness.

[^928]: The commentary explains *[opabhoggā]{lang="sa"}* ("reward") as
    *[pādaparicārikā]{lang="sa"}* ("wife").

[^929]: Read *[opāṭesi]{lang="sa"}*.

[^930]: Prefer [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading *[yāva]{lang="sa"}
    [vijāyāmi]{lang="sa"}* over PTS *[yāva]{lang="sa"}
    [jānāmi]{lang="sa"}* ("until I know"); it echoes *[yāva]{lang="sa"}
    [vijāyāmi]{lang="sa"}* above. The phrase is not fully coherent,
    which is understandable given the circumstances.

[^931]: "Irrationally" is *ayoniso*, literally "not sourcewise". This
    passage gives a nice real world example of what it means: the means
    employed are unrelated to the end sought.

[^932]: [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}'s experiments were cruel, but no more so
    than many recorded in recent history.

[^933]: We assume that a soul must be immaterial and invisible, but
    clearly this was not always the case at the time. From [DN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato) we know that there was an
    almost inexhaustible variety of views about the self or soul.

[^934]: This echoes [Upaniṣadic]{lang="sa"} discussions of the nature of
    the dream state and its relation to death. See for example
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.1.18, which says
    one might become a brahmin or king in a dream.

[^935]: [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.3.19
    describes the soul returning to the body like a tired hawk returning
    to the nest.

[^936]: Aside from the cruelty, this echoes the dictum attributed to
    Galileo: "Measure what is measurable, and make measurable what is
    not so." Given sufficient precision, this method could be effective
    in testing for the existence for a physical soul that has mass.

[^937]: A dead body will, if anything, weigh less due to excretion and
    dehydration.

[^938]: The misconception that iron is lighter when heated is repeated
    elsewhere (eg. [SN
    51.22:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn51.22/en/sujato#4.1)). In
    fact, assuming there are no chemical reactions, it will be very
    slightly heavier due to relativistic effects, yet less dense and
    hence more buoyant. These changes are too small to be detected by
    [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}'s methods, though.

[^939]: The commentary explains *[āmato]{lang="sa"}* as *addhamato*
    ("half-dead").

[^940]: At [AN 9.37](https://suttacentral.net/an9.37/en/sujato) this
    rather abrupt insertion more aptly describes a deep meditation.

[^941]: [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.4.8 employs
    the same metaphor in the search for the soul.

[^942]: Accept PTS reading *gavesasi*.

[^943]: [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} honestly acknowledges the role of social
    conformity and shame in shaping views.

[^944]: Although this became the first story of the [Jātaka]{lang="sa"}
    collection ([Ja 1](https://suttacentral.net/ja1/en/sujato)), here it
    is not a [Jātaka]{lang="sa"}, as it is not framed as a past life of
    the Buddha.

[^945]: While the places are not specified, the journey from "east to
    west" across desolate lands suggests they may have been venturing
    from the rich plains of the Ganges west across the Thar Desert of
    Rajasthan.

[^946]: Read with PTS *gadrabharathena* ("donkey cart") for *bhadrena
    rathena* ("fine cart").

[^947]: The obviously suspicious stranger depicts the genuine dangers of
    trade in unknown regions, warning the traveler of raiding tribes as
    well as supernatural creatures.

[^948]: Again the criteria that only those who are known may be trusted.

[^949]: The ancient Indian game of dice involved casting an handful of
    *[vibhītaka]{lang="sa"}* seeds (also known as "bedda nuts", from
    Terminalia bellirica). A number divisible by four was "perfect"
    (*[kaṭa]{lang="sa"}*), so the fifth seed meant a "losing" throw
    (*kali*; cf. *[apaṇṇaka]{lang="sa"}* in [MN
    60](https://suttacentral.net/mn60/en/sujato) and notes).

[^950]: *[Pajohissāmi]{lang="sa"}* is related to Sanskrit *juhoti*,
    usually used in the sense "to offer as libation", a meaning accepted
    by the commentary here. More likely it simply means to "roll out"
    (like pouring a sacrifice) by analogy.

[^951]: *[Gāmapaṭṭaṁ]{lang="sa"}* (variants *-[padaṁ]{lang="sa"}*,
    *-[paddhanaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, *-[patthaṁ]{lang="sa"}*,
    *[pajjaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) is explained by the commentary as an
    abandoned village site.

[^952]: The sunk cost fallacy.

[^953]: Say what you will about [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"}, he had character.

[^954]: Compare [DN 5:4.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#4.5).

[^955]: For *[guḷavālakāni]{lang="sa"}*, *[guḷa]{lang="sa"}* is "ball",
    *[vāla]{lang="sa"}* is "tail"; compare *[macchavāḷaka]{lang="sa"}*
    ("fish-tailed") at [Kd
    15:29.4.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd15/en/sujato#29.4.2).

[^956]: Cp. [AN 5.147](https://suttacentral.net/an5.147/en/sujato), [AN
    9.20](https://suttacentral.net/an9.20/en/sujato).

[^957]: *[Divāvihāra]{lang="sa"}* is the "day's meditation", while
    *[divāseyya]{lang="sa"}* is "siesta".
