::::::::::: center
::: large
:::

::: normalsize
*translated and introduced by*
:::

::: LARGE
[Bhikkhu Sujato]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: normalsize
DN 24--34
:::

::: Large
[The Chapter with Pāṭikaputta]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: large
[SuttaCentral]{.smallcaps}
:::
:::::::::::

:::: footnotesize
*Long Discourses* is a translation of the Dīghanikāya by Bhikkhu Sujato.

Creative Commons Zero (CC0)

To the extent possible under law, Bhikkhu Sujato has waived all
copyright and related or neighboring rights to *Long Discourses*.

This work is published from Australia.

::: center
*This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.*
:::

Web publication date

:   2018

This edition

:   2025-01-27 00:57:58

Publication type

:   paperback

Edition

:   ed5

Number of volumes

:   3

Publication ISBN

:   978-1-76132-052-1

Volume ISBN

:   978-1-76132-096-5

Publication URL

:   <https://suttacentral.net/editions/dn/en/sujato>

Source URL

:   <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/dn>

Publication number

:   scpub2

Map of Jambudīpa is by Jonas David Mitja Lang, and is released by him
under Creative Commons Zero (CC0).

Published by SuttaCentral

*SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia*
::::

## Summary of Contents {#summary-of-contents .unnumbered}

The Chapter with [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} (*[Pāthikavagga]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Like the previous chapter, this contains a diverse range of
    discourses. It is named after the first discourse in the chapter.
    Among the discourses here are legendary accounts of the history and
    future of our world, which are extremely famous and influential in
    Buddhist circles.

DN 24: About [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} (*[Pāthikasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   When Sunakkhatta threatens to disrobe, the Buddha is unimpressed.
    Rejecting showy displays of asceticism or wondrous powers, he
    demonstrates his pre-eminence.

DN 25: The Lion's Roar at [Udumbarikā]{lang="sa"}'s Monastery (*[Udumbarikasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   This discourse gives a specially good example of dialog between
    religions. The Buddha insists that he is not interested to make
    anyone give up their teacher or practices, but only to help people
    let go of suffering.

DN 26: The Wheel-Turning Monarch (*[Cakkavattisutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   In illustration of his dictum that one should rely on oneself, the
    Buddha gives a detailed account of the fall of a kingly lineage of
    the past, and the subsequent degeneration of society. This process,
    however, is not over, as the Buddha predicts that eventually society
    will fall into utter chaos. But far in the future, another Buddha,
    Metteyya, will arise in a time of peace and plenty.

DN 27: The Origin of the World (*[Aggaññasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   In contrast with the brahmin's self-serving mythologies of the past,
    the Buddha presents an account of evolution that shows how human
    choices are an integral part of the ecological balance, and how
    excessive greed destroys the order of nature.

DN 28: Inspiring Confidence (*[Sampasādanīyasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Shortly before he passes away, Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}
    visits the Buddha and utters a moving eulogy of his great teacher.

DN 29: An Impressive Discourse (*[Pāsādikasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Following the death of [Nigaṇṭha]{lang="sa"} [Nātaputta]{lang="sa"},
    the leader of the Jains, the Buddha emphasizes the stability and
    maturity of his own community. He encourages the community to come
    together after his death and recite the teachings in harmony.

DN 30: The Marks of a Great Man (*[Lakkhaṇasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   This presents the brahmanical prophecy of the Great Man, and
    explains the 32 marks in detail. This discourse contains some of the
    latest and most complex verse forms in the canon.

DN 31: Advice to [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"} (*[Siṅgālasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   The Buddha encounters a young man who honors his dead parents by
    performing rituals. The Buddha recasts the meaningless rites in
    terms of virtuous conduct. This is the most detailed discourse on
    ethics for lay people.

DN 32: The [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} Protection (*[Āṭānāṭiyasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   Mighty spirits hold a congregation, and warn the Buddha that, since
    not all spirits are friendly, the mendicants should learn verses of
    protection.

DN 33: Reciting in Concert (*[Saṅgītisutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   The Buddha encourages Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} to teach the
    mendicants, and he offers an extended listing of Buddhist doctrines
    arranged in numerical sequence.

DN 34: Up to Ten (*[Dasuttarasutta]{lang="sa"}*)

:   This is similar to the previous, but with a different manner of
    exposition. These two discourses anticipate some of the methods of
    the Abhidhamma.

# The Chapter with Pāṭikaputta  {#the-chapter-with-pāṭikaputta .unnumbered}

## N 24 About Pāṭikaputta  *Pāthikasutta* {#n-24-about-pāṭikaputta-pāthikasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. The Story of Sunakkhatta  {#the-story-of-sunakkhatta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Mallas, near the Mallian town named Anupiya.[^1] Then the
Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered
Anupiya for alms. Then it occurred to him, "It's too early to wander for
alms in Anupiya. Why don't I go to visit the wanderer of the Bhaggava
clan in his monastery?"[^2]

So that's what he did. Then the wanderer of the Bhaggava clan said to
the Buddha, "Let the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One,
sir! It's been a long time since you took the opportunity to come here.
Please, sir, sit down, this seat is ready."

The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while the wanderer of the
Bhaggava clan took a low seat, sat to one side, and said to the Buddha,
"Sir, a few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me and said:[^3]
'Now, Bhaggava, I have rejected the Buddha. Now I no longer live
dedicated to him.' Sir, is what Sunakkhatta said true?"

"Indeed it is, Bhaggava.

A few days ago Sunakkhatta the Licchavi came to me, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said: 'Now I reject the Buddha! Now I shall no longer live
dedicated to you.'

When Sunakkhatta said this, I said to him, 'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever
say to you: "Come, live dedicated to me"?'[^4]

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the
Buddha"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask you to live dedicated to me, nor did you
say you would live dedicated to me. In that case, you futile man, who
are you and what are you rejecting? See how far you have strayed!'

'But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman demonstrations of
psychic power for me.'[^5]

'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you: "Come, live dedicated to me and
I will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power for you"?'

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha,
and the Buddha will perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power
for me"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it
of me. In that case, you futile man, who are you and what are you
rejecting? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether or not there is a
demonstration of psychic power, does my teaching lead someone who
practices it to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?'

'It does, sir.'

'So it seems that whether or not there is a demonstration of psychic
power, my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the
complete ending of suffering. In that case, what is the point of
superhuman demonstrations of psychic power? See how far you have
strayed, you silly man!'

'But sir, the Buddha never describes the origin of the world to me.'

'But Sunakkhatta, did I ever say to you: "Come, live dedicated to me and
I will describe the origin of the world to you"?'

'No, sir.'

'Or did you ever say to me: "Sir, I shall live dedicated to the Buddha,
and the Buddha will describe the origin of the world to me"?'

'No, sir.'

'So it seems that I did not ask this of you, and you did not require it
of me. In that case, you futile man, who are you and what are you
rejecting? What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Whether or not the origin of
the world is described, does my teaching lead someone who practices it
to the goal of the complete ending of suffering?'

'It does, sir.'

'So it seems that whether or not the origin of the world is described,
my teaching leads someone who practices it to the goal of the complete
ending of suffering. In that case, what is the point of describing the
origin of the world? See how far you have strayed, you silly man!

In many ways, Sunakkhatta, you have praised me like this in the Vajjian
capital: "That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed."

In many ways you have praised the teaching like this in the Vajjian
capital: "The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

In many ways you have praised the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} like this in the
Vajjian capital: "The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is
practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world."

I declare this to you, Sunakkhatta, I announce this to you! There will
be those who say that Sunakkhatta was unable to lead the spiritual life
under the ascetic Gotama. That's why he resigned the training and
returned to a lesser life. That's what they'll say.'

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 2. On the Aristocrat of Kuru  {#on-the-aristocrat-of-kuru .unnumbered}

Bhaggava, this one time I was staying in the land of the Kurus where
they have a town named [Uttarakā]{lang="sa"}.[^6] Then I robed up in the
morning and, taking my bowl and robe, entered [Uttarakā]{lang="sa"} for
alms with Sunakkhatta the Licchavi as my second monk. Now at that time a
naked ascetic who was an aristocrat of Kuru had taken a vow to behave
like a dog. When food is tossed on the ground, he gets down on all
fours, eating and devouring it just with his mouth.[^7]

Sunakkhatta saw him doing this and thought, 'That ascetic is a holy
man!'[^8]

Then, knowing Sunakkhatta's train of thought, I said to him, 'Don't you
claim to be an ascetic who follows the Sakyan, you silly man?'

'But why does the Buddha say this to me?'

'When you saw that naked ascetic of Kuru, didn't you think, "That
ascetic is a holy man!"?'

'Yes, sir. But sir, are you jealous of the perfected ones?'

'I'm not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man. Rather, you
should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you. Don't
create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

That naked ascetic the aristocrat of Kuru, who you imagine to be a holy
man, will die of flatulence in seven days.[^9] And when he dies, he'll
be reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the
[Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"}.[^10] And they'll throw him in the charnel
ground on a clump of vetiver. If you wish, Sunakkhatta, go to the
aristocrat of Kuru and ask him whether he knows his own destiny. It's
possible that he will answer: "Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own
destiny. I've been reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the
[Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"}."'

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see the aristocrat of Kuru and said to
him, 'Reverend aristocrat of Kuru, the ascetic Gotama has declared that
you will die of flatulence in seven days. And when you die, you'll be
reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the
[Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"}. And when you die, they'll throw you in the
charnel ground on a clump of vetiver. But by eating just a little food
and drinking just a little water, you'll prove what the ascetic Gotama
says to be false.'

Then Sunakkhatta counted up the days until the seventh day, as happens
when you have no faith in the Realized One. But on the seventh day, the
naked ascetic who was an aristocrat of Kuru died of flatulence. And when
he passed away, he was reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named
the [Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"}. And when he passed away, they threw him in
the charnel ground on a clump of vetiver.

Sunakkhatta the Licchavi heard about this. So he went to see the
aristocrat of Kuru in the charnel ground on the clump of vetiver. There
he struck him with his fist three times, 'Reverend aristocrat of Kuru,
do you know your destiny?'

Then the aristocrat of Kuru got up, rubbing his back with his hands, and
said,[^11] 'Reverend Sunakkhatta, I know my own destiny. I've been
reborn in the very lowest rank of titans, named the
[Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"}.' After speaking, he fell flat right there.

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the prediction I made about
the aristocrat of Kuru turn out to be correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I performed such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'
Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 3. On the Naked Ascetic [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"}  {#on-the-naked-ascetic-kaḷāramaṭṭaka .unnumbered}

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time the naked
ascetic [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"} was residing in [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}.
And in the Vajjian capital he had reached the peak of material things
and fame.[^12] He had undertaken these seven vows.[^13] 'As long as I
live, I will be a naked ascetic, not wearing clothes. As long as I live,
I will be celibate, not having sex. As long as I live, I will consume
only meat and beer, not eating rice and porridge.[^14] And I will not go
past the following tree-shrines near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}: the Udena
shrine to the east, the Gotamaka to the south, the Seven Maidens to the
west, and the Many Sons to the north.'[^15] And it was due to
undertaking these seven vows that he had reached the peak of material
things and fame.

So, Bhaggava, Sunakkhatta went to see [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"} and
asked him a question. But when it stumped him, he displayed annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. So Sunakkhatta thought, 'I've offended the holy
man, the perfected one, the ascetic.[^16] I mustn't create lasting harm
and suffering for myself!'

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'Don't you claim to be an ascetic who follows the Sakyan, you silly
man?'

'But why does the Buddha say this to me?'

'Didn't you go to see the naked ascetic [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"} and
ask him a question? But when it stumped him, he displayed annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Then you thought, "I've offended the holy man, the
perfected one, the ascetic. I mustn't create lasting harm and suffering
for myself!"'

'Yes, sir. But sir, are you jealous of perfected ones?'

'I'm not jealous of the perfected ones, you silly man. Rather, you
should give up this harmful misconception that has arisen in you. Don't
create lasting harm and suffering for yourself!

That naked ascetic [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"}, who you imagine to be a
true holy man, will shortly be clothed, living with a partner, eating
rice and porridge, having gone past all the shrines near
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. And he will die after losing all his fame.'

And that's exactly what happened.

Sunakkhatta heard about this. He came to me, bowed, and sat down to one
side. I said to him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the
declaration I made about [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"} turn out to be
correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'
Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 4. On the Naked Ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}  {#on-the-naked-ascetic-pāṭikaputta .unnumbered}

This one time, Bhaggava, I was staying right there near
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof. Now at that time the naked ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} was
residing in [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. And in the Vajjian capital he had
reached the peak of material things and fame.[^17] He was telling a
crowd in [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}: 'Both the ascetic Gotama and I speak from
knowledge.[^18] One who speaks from knowledge ought to display a
superhuman demonstration of psychic power to another who speaks from
knowledge. If the ascetic Gotama meets me half-way, there we should both
perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power. If he performs one
demonstration of psychic power, I'll perform two. If he performs two,
I'll perform four. If he performs four, I'll perform eight. However many
demonstrations of psychic power the ascetic Gotama performs, I'll
perform double.'

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, sat down to one side, and told me of
all this.

I said to him, 'Sunakkhatta, the naked ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}
is not capable of meeting me face to face, unless he gives up that
statement and that intention, and lets go of that view. If he thinks he
can meet me face to face without giving up those things, his head may
explode.'

'Careful what you say, Blessed One! Careful what you say, Holy One!'

'But why do you say this to me, Sunakkhatta?'

'Sir, the Buddha has categorically asserted that
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable of meeting the Buddha face to
face, otherwise his head may explode. But [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} might
meet the Buddha face to face in disguise, proving the Buddha wrong.'

'Sunakkhatta, would the Realized One make an ambiguous statement?'[^19]

'But sir, did you make that statement after comprehending
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s mind with your mind? Or did deities tell you
about it?'

'Both, Sunakkhatta. For Ajita the Licchavi general has recently passed
away and been reborn in the host of the thirty-three. He came and told
me this, "The naked ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is shameless, sir,
he is a liar. For he has declared of me in the Vajjian capital: 'Ajita
the Licchavi general has been reborn in the Great Hell.'

But that is not true---I have been reborn in the host of the
thirty-three. The naked ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is shameless,
sir, he is a liar. [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable of meeting
the Buddha face to face, otherwise his head may explode."

Thus I both made that statement after comprehending
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s mind with my mind, and deities told me about
it.

So Sunakkhatta, I'll wander for alms in [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}. After the
meal, on my return from almsround, I'll go to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery for the day's meditation. Now you may tell him, if you so
wish.'

### 5. On Demonstrations of Psychic Power  {#on-demonstrations-of-psychic-power .unnumbered}

Then, Bhaggava, I robed up in the morning and, taking my bowl and robe,
entered [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} for alms. After the meal, on my return from
almsround, I went to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s monastery for the day's
meditation. Then Sunakkhatta rushed into [Vesālī]{lang="sa"} to see the
very well-known Licchavis and said to them, 'Sirs, after his almsround,
the Buddha has gone to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s monastery for the
day's meditation. Come forth, sirs, come forth! There will be a
superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!' So the
very well-known Licchavis thought, 'It seems there will be a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics! Let's go!'

Then he went to see the very well-known well-to-do brahmins, rich
householders, and ascetics and brahmins who follow various other
religions, and said the same thing. They all said, 'It seems there will
be a superhuman demonstration of psychic power by the holy ascetics!
Let's go!'

Then all those very well-known people went to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery. That assembly was large, Bhaggava; there were many hundreds,
many thousands of them.

[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} heard, 'It seems that very well-known
Licchavis, well-to-do brahmins, rich householders, and ascetics and
brahmins who follow various other religions have come forth. And the
ascetic Gotama is sitting in my monastery for the day's meditation.'
When he heard that, he became frightened, scared, his hair standing on
end. In fear he went to the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery of the
wanderers.

The assembly heard of this, and instructed a man, 'Come, my man, go to
see [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} at the Pale-Moon Ebony Trunk Monastery and
say to him, "Come forth, Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}! All these
very well-known people have come forth, and the ascetic Gotama is
sitting in your monastery for the day's meditation. For you stated this
in the assembly at [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}: 'Both the ascetic Gotama and I
speak from knowledge. One who speaks from knowledge ought to display a
superhuman demonstration of psychic power to another who speaks from
knowledge. If the ascetic Gotama meets me half-way, there we should both
perform a superhuman demonstration of psychic power. If he performs one
demonstration of psychic power, I'll perform two. If he performs two,
I'll perform four. If he performs four, I'll perform eight. However many
demonstrations of psychic power the ascetic Gotama performs, I'll
perform double.' Come forth, Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"},
half-way. The ascetic Gotama has come the first half, and is sitting in
your monastery."'

'Yes, sir,' replied that man, and delivered the message.

When he had spoken, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then
that man said to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}, 'What's up, Reverend
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or is the
bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!" But
wriggle as you might, you can't get up from your seat.' And as he was
speaking, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!'
But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat.

When that man knew that [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} had lost, he returned
to the assembly and said, '[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} has lost, sirs. He
says "I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as he might, he can't
get up from his seat.' When he said this, I said to the assembly, 'The
naked ascetic [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable of meeting me face
to face, unless he gives up that statement and that intention, and lets
go of that view. If he thinks he can meet me face to face without giving
up those things, his head may explode.'

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

Then, Bhaggava, a certain Licchavi minister stood up and said to the
assembly, 'Well then, sirs, wait an hour, I'll go. Hopefully I'll be
able to lead [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} back to the assembly.'

So that minister went to see [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} and said, 'Come
forth, Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}! It's best for you to come
forth. All these very well-known people have come forth, and the ascetic
Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the day's meditation. You said
you'd meet the ascetic Gotama half-way. The ascetic Gotama has come the
first half, and is sitting in your monastery. The ascetic Gotama has
told the assembly that you're not capable of meeting him face to face.
Come forth, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}! When you come forth we'll make you
win and the ascetic Gotama lose.'

When he had spoken, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then
the minister said to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}, 'What's up, Reverend
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or is the
bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!" But
wriggle as you might, you can't get up from your seat.' And as he was
speaking, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm coming!'
But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat.

When the Licchavi minister knew that [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} had lost,
he returned to the assembly and said, '[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} has
lost, sirs.' When he said this, I said to the assembly,
'[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable of meeting me face to face,
otherwise his head may explode. Even if the good Licchavis were to
think, "Let's bind [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} with straps and drag him
with a pair of oxen!" But either the straps will break or
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} will.'

Then, Bhaggava, [Jāliya]{lang="sa"}, the pupil of the wood-bowl ascetic,
stood up and said to the assembly, 'Well then, sirs, wait an hour, I'll
go. Hopefully I'll be able to lead [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} back to the
assembly.'

So [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} went to see [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} and said,
'Come forth, Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}! It's best for you to
come forth. All these very well-known people have come forth, and the
ascetic Gotama is sitting in your monastery for the day's meditation.
You said you'd meet the ascetic Gotama half-way. The ascetic Gotama has
come the first half, and is sitting in your monastery. The ascetic
Gotama has told the assembly that you're not capable of meeting him face
to face. And he said that even if the Licchavis try to bind you with
straps and drag you with a pair of oxen, either the straps will break or
you will. Come forth, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}! When you come forth
we'll make you win and the ascetic Gotama lose.'

When he had spoken, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat. Then
[Jāliya]{lang="sa"} said to [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}, 'What's up,
Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}? Is your bottom stuck to the bench, or
is the bench stuck to your bottom? You say "I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!" But wriggle as you might, you can't get up from your seat.' And
as he was speaking, [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} said: 'I'm coming, sir, I'm
coming!' But wriggle as he might, he couldn't get up from his seat.

When [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} knew that [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} had lost, he
said to him,

'Once upon a time, Reverend [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"}, it occurred to a
lion, king of beasts, "Why don't I make my lair near a certain forest?
Towards evening I can emerge from my den, yawn, look all around the four
quarters, roar my lion's roar three times, and set out on the hunt.
Having slain the very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most tender
flesh, I could return to my den."

And so that's what he did.

Now, there was an old jackal who had grown fat on the lion's leavings,
becoming arrogant and strong. He thought, "What does the lion, king of
beasts, have that I don't? Why don't I also make my lair near a certain
forest? Towards evening I can emerge from my den, yawn, look all around
the four quarters, roar my lion's roar three times, and set out on the
hunt. Having slain the very best of the deer herd, and eaten the most
tender flesh, I could return to my den."

And so that's what he did. But when he tried to roar a lion's roar, he
only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal. And what is a pathetic
jackal's squeal next to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha![^20] Who are
the pathetic [Pāṭikaputtas]{lang="sa"} to attack the Realized Ones, the
perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas?'

When [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} couldn't get [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} to shift
from his seat even with this simile, he said to him:

> 'Seeing himself as equal to the lion,\
> the jackal presumed "I'm the king of the beasts!"\
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, you presume to attack him!'

When [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} couldn't get [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} to shift
from his seat even with this simile, he said to him:

> 'Following in the steps of another,\
> seeing himself grown fat on scraps,\
> until he doesn't even see himself,\
> the jackal presumes he's a tiger.
>
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, you presume to attack him!'

When [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} couldn't get [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} to shift
from his seat even with this simile, he said to him:

> 'Gorged on frogs, and mice from the barn,\
> and carcasses tossed in the cemetery,\
> thriving in the great, empty wood,\
> the jackal presumed "I'm the king of the beasts!"\
> But he actually only managed to yelp,\
> and what's a sad jackal's squeal to the roar of a lion?

In the same way, reverend, while living off the leavings of the Holy
One, enjoying the leftovers of the Holy One, you presume to attack the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha! Who are the
pathetic [Pāṭikaputtas]{lang="sa"} to attack the Realized Ones, the
perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas?'

When [Jāliya]{lang="sa"} couldn't get [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} to shift
from his seat even with this simile, he returned to the assembly and
said, '[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} has lost, sirs. He says "I'm coming,
sir, I'm coming!" But wriggle as he might, he can't get up from his
seat.'

When he said this, I said to the assembly, 'The naked ascetic
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable of meeting me face to face,
unless he gives up that statement and that intention, and lets go of
that view. If he thinks he can meet me face to face without giving up
those things, his head may explode. The good Licchavis might even think,
"Let's bind [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} with straps and drag him with a
pair of oxen!" But either the straps will break or
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} will. [Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} is not capable
of meeting me face to face, otherwise his head may explode.'

Then, Bhaggava, I educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired that
assembly with a Dhamma talk. I released that assembly from the great
bondage, and lifted 84,000 beings from the great swamp. Next I entered
upon the fire element, rose into the air to the height of seven palm
trees, and created a flame another seven palm trees high, blazing and
smoking. Finally I landed at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof.[^21]

Then Sunakkhatta came to me, bowed, and sat down to one side. I said to
him, 'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Did the declaration I made about
[Pāṭikaputta]{lang="sa"} turn out to be correct, or not?'

'It turned out to be correct.'

'What do you think, Sunakkhatta? If that is so, has a superhuman
demonstration of psychic power been performed or not?'

'Clearly, sir, a superhuman demonstration of psychic power has been
performed.'

'Though I perform such a superhuman demonstration of psychic power you
say this: "But sir, the Buddha never performs any superhuman
demonstrations of psychic power for me." See how far you have strayed!'

Though I spoke to Sunakkhatta like this, he still left this teaching and
training, like someone on the highway to hell.

### 6. On Describing the Origin of the World  {#on-describing-the-origin-of-the-world .unnumbered}

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. I understand this, and
what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding,
I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the
Realized One does not come to ruin.[^22]

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as created by the God Almighty, by the
Divinity. I go up to them and say, 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do
you describe in your tradition that the origin of the world came about
as created by the God Almighty, by the Divinity?' But they are stumped
by my question, and they even question me in return. So I answer them,

'There comes a time when, reverends, after a very long period has
passed, this cosmos contracts. As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings
are mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance. There they are
mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos expands. As it expands an empty mansion of divinity appears. Then
a certain sentient being---due to the running out of their lifespan or
merit---passes away from that host of radiant deities and is reborn in
that empty mansion of divinity. There they are mind-made, feeding on
rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they
remain like that for a very long time.

But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become
dissatisfied and anxious, "Oh, if only other beings would come to this
place."

Then other sentient beings---due to the running out of their lifespan or
merit---pass away from that host of radiant deities and are reborn in
that mansion of divinity in company with that being.[^23] There they too
are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks, "I am the Divinity,
the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal
Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the
First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been
born and those yet to be born. And these beings were created by me. Why
is that? Because first I thought, 'Oh, if only other beings would come
to this place.' Such was my heart's wish, and then these creatures came
to this place."

And the beings who were reborn there later also think, "This must be the
Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the
Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the
Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those
who have been born and those yet to be born. And we were created by him.
Why is that? Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we
arrived later."

And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and
illustrious than those who arrived later.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: "He who is the Divinity---the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher,
the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God
Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born---by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. We who were created
by that Divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to
pass away, and have come to this place." Is this how you describe in
your tradition that the origin of the world came about as created by the
God Almighty, by the Divinity?'[^24]

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'[^25]

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. I understand this, and
what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not misapprehend that understanding,
I have realized quenching within myself. Directly knowing this, the
Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as due to those depraved by play. I go up to
them and say, 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And
they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do you describe in your
tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those depraved
by play?' But they are stumped by my question, and they even question me
in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "depraved by play". They spend too much
time laughing, playing, and making merry. And in doing so, they lose
their mindfulness, and they pass away from that host of gods.[^26]

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say, "The gods not depraved by play don't spend too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don't lose their
mindfulness, and don't pass away from that host of gods. They are
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for
all eternity. But we who were depraved by play spent too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our
mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods. We are impermanent,
not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this
place." Is this how you describe in your tradition that the origin of
the world came about due to those depraved by play?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. Directly knowing this,
the Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as due to those who are malevolent.[^27] I go
up to them and say, 'Is it really true that this is the venerables'
view?' And they answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do you describe
in your tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those
who are malevolent?' But they are stumped by my question, and they even
question me in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "malevolent". They spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they grow angry with each other, and their
bodies and minds get tired. They pass away from that host of gods.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say, "The gods who are not malevolent don't spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they don't grow angry with each other, their
bodies and minds don't get tired, and they don't pass away from that
host of gods. They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable,
remaining the same for all eternity. But we who were malevolent spent
too much time gazing at each other, so our minds grew angry with each
other, our bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host
of gods. We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass
away, and have come to this place." Is this how you describe in your
tradition that the origin of the world came about due to those who are
malevolent?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

Bhaggava, I understand the origin of the world. Directly knowing this,
the Realized One does not come to ruin.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who describe the origin of the
world in their tradition as having arisen by chance. I go up to them and
say, 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answer, 'Yes'. I say to them, 'But how do you describe in your tradition
that the origin of the world came about by chance?' But they are stumped
by my question, and they even question me in return. So I answer them,

'Reverends, there are gods named "non-percipient beings".[^28] When
perception arises they pass away from that host of gods.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect the arising of perception, but no
further.

They say, "The self and the cosmos arose by chance. Why is that? Because
formerly I didn't exist, whereas now, having not existed, I've
transformed into the state of existing." Is this how you describe in
your tradition that the origin of the world came about by chance?'

They say, 'That is what we have heard, Reverend Gotama, just as you
say.'

I understand this, and what goes beyond it. Yet since I do not
misapprehend that understanding, I have realized quenching within
myself. Directly knowing this, the Realized One does not come to ruin.

Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins
misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:
'The ascetic Gotama has a distorted perspective, and so have his monks.

He says, "When one enters and remains in the liberation of the
beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is ugly."'

But I don't say that. I say this: 'When one enters and remains in the
liberation of the beautiful, at that time one only perceives what is
beautiful.'"

"They are the ones with a distorted perspective, sir, who regard the
Buddha and the mendicants in this way. Sir, I am quite confident that
the Buddha is capable of teaching me so that I can enter and remain in
the liberation on the beautiful."

"It's hard for you to enter and remain in the liberation on the
beautiful, since you have a different view, creed, and belief, unless
you dedicate yourself to practice with the guidance of tradition. Come
now, Bhaggava, carefully preserve the confidence that you have in me."

"If it's hard for me to enter and remain in the liberation on the
beautiful, since I have a different view, creed, and belief, unless I
dedicate myself to practice with the guidance of tradition, I shall
carefully preserve the confidence that I have in the Buddha."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the wanderer of the Bhaggava
clan approved what the Buddha said.

## N 25 The Lion's Roar at the Monastery of Lady Udumbarikā  *Udumbarikasutta* {#n-25-the-lions-roar-at-the-monastery-of-lady-udumbarikā-udumbarikasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. The Story of the Wanderer Nigrodha  {#the-story-of-the-wanderer-nigrodha .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time the wanderer Nigrodha was residing in the lady
[Udumbarikā]{lang="sa"}'s monastery for wanderers, together with a large
assembly of three thousand wanderers.[^29] Then the householder
[Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} left [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} in the middle of the
day to see the Buddha.[^30]

Then it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he's
in retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants, as
they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the wanderer Nigrodha at the lady
[Udumbarikā]{lang="sa"}'s monastery for wanderers?" So he went to the
monastery of the wanderers.

Now at that time, Nigrodha was sitting together with a large assembly of
wanderers making an uproar, a dreadful racket. They engaged in all kinds
of low talk, such as talk about kings, bandits, and chief ministers;
talk about armies, threats, and wars; talk about food, drink, clothes,
and beds; talk about garlands and fragrances; talk about family,
vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and countries; talk about women and
heroes; street talk and well talk; talk about the departed; motley talk;
tales of land and sea; and talk about being reborn in this or that state
of existence.

Nigrodha saw [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} coming off in the distance, and
hushed his own assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound. The
householder [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"}, a disciple of the ascetic Gotama, is
coming. He is included among the white-clothed lay disciples of the
ascetic Gotama, who is residing near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}. Such
venerables like the quiet, are educated to be quiet, and praise the
quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to
approach." Then those wanderers fell silent.

Then [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Nigrodha, "The way the
wanderers make an uproar as they sit together and talk about all kinds
of low topics is one thing. It's quite different to the way the Buddha
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest that are
quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human
settlements, and fit for retreat."

When [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} said this, Nigrodha said to him, "Surely,
householder, you should know better! With whom does the ascetic Gotama
converse? With whom does he engage in discussion? With whom does he
achieve lucidity of wisdom? Staying in empty huts has destroyed the
ascetic Gotama's wisdom. Not frequenting assemblies, he is unable to
hold a discussion. He just lurks on the periphery. He's just like a
one-eyed cow, circling around and lurking on the periphery.[^31] Go on,
householder! Were the ascetic Gotama to come to this assembly, I'd sink
him with just one question! I'd tie him up like a hollow pot!"[^32]

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, the Buddha heard
this discussion between the householder [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} and the
wanderer Nigrodha. Then the Buddha descended from Vulture's Peak
Mountain and went to the peacocks' feeding ground on the bank of the
[Sumāgadhā]{lang="sa"}, where he walked mindfully in the open air.

Nigrodha saw him, and hushed his own assembly: "Be quiet, good sirs,
don't make a sound. The ascetic Gotama is walking mindfully on the bank
of the [Sumāgadhā]{lang="sa"}. The venerable likes quiet and praises
quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is quiet he'll see fit to
approach. If he comes, I'll ask him this question: 'Sir, what teaching
do you use to guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in
the fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?'" Then those wanderers
fell silent.

### 2. Mortification in Disgust of Sin  {#mortification-in-disgust-of-sin .unnumbered}

Then the Buddha went up to the wanderer Nigrodha, who said to him, "Let
the Blessed One come, sir! Welcome to the Blessed One, sir! It's been a
long time since you took the opportunity to come here. Please, sir, sit
down, this seat is ready." The Buddha sat on the seat spread out, while
Nigrodha took a low seat and sat to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Nigrodha, what were you sitting talking about just now? What
conversation was left unfinished?"[^33]

Nigrodha said, "Well, sir, I saw you walking mindfully and said: 'If the
ascetic Gotama comes, I'll ask him this question: "Sir, what teaching do
you use to guide your disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?"' This is the conversation
that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"It's hard for you to understand this, Nigrodha, since you have a
different view, creed, and belief, unless you dedicate yourself to
practice with the guidance of tradition. Please ask me a question about
the higher disgust of sin in your own tradition:[^34] 'How are the
conditions for the fervent mortification in disgust of sin completed,
and how are they incomplete?'"[^35]

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "Oh, how incredible,
how amazing! The ascetic Gotama has such power and might! For he sets
aside his own doctrine and invites discussion on the doctrine of
others!"

Then Nigrodha, having quieted those wanderers, said to the Buddha, "Sir,
we teach fervent mortification in disgust of sin, regarding it as
essential and sticking to it. How are the conditions for the fervent
mortification in disgust of sin completed, and how are they incomplete?"

"Nigrodha, it's when a mortifier goes naked, ignoring conventions. They
lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent
to food brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an
invitation for a meal.[^36] They don't receive anything from a pot or
bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel
in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman
who is pregnant, breast-feeding, or who lives with a man; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. They go to just one house
for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up
to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live committed to the practice of eating food at set
intervals. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They make their bed on a plank, or the bare ground. They lie only on one
side. They wear dust and dirt. They stay in the open air. They sleep
wherever they lay their mat. They eat unnatural things, committed to the
practice of eating unnatural foods. They don't drink, committed to the
practice of not drinking liquids. They're devoted to ritual bathing
three times a day, including the evening.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin complete, or incomplete?"

"Clearly, sir, if that is so the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
is complete, not incomplete."

"But even such a completed mortification has many defects, I say."

#### 2.1. Defects  {#defects .unnumbered}

"But how does the Buddha say that even such a completed mortification
has many defects?"

"Firstly, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They're
happy with that, as they've got all they wished for.[^37] This is a
defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too is a
defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account of
that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for. This too is
a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They glorify themselves and put others down on account of that. This too
is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They become indulgent and infatuated and fall into negligence on account
of that. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier becomes fussy about food, saying, 'This is
acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not acceptable
they give up in expectation.[^38] But what is acceptable they eat tied,
infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the
escape. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification out of
longing for possessions, honor, and popularity, thinking, 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier rebukes a certain ascetic or brahmin, 'But what
is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this ascetic's
doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or
joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is crunched together
like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' This too is a defect in that
mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. They
think, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored, respected,
esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent mortifier
who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated
among good families.' Thus they give rise to jealousy and stinginess
regarding families. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sits meditation only when people can see them.
This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sneaks about among families, thinking,[^39]
'This is part of my mortification; this is part of my mortification.'
This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier sometimes behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it is, even
though it isn't. Or they say it isn't, even though it is. Thus they tell
a deliberate lie. This too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier disagrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma, even when they make a valid point. This
too is a defect in that mortifier.

Furthermore, a mortifier is irritable and acrimonious ... offensive and
contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they have corrupt wishes, falling under the
sway of corrupt wishes ... they have wrong view, being attached to an
extremist view ... they're attached to their own views, holding them
tight, and refusing to let go.[^40] This too is a defect in that
mortifier.

What do you think, Nigrodha? Are such mortifications defective or not?"

"Clearly, sir, they're defective. It's possible that a mortifier might
have all of these defects, let alone one or other of them."

#### 2.2. On Reaching the Shoots  {#on-reaching-the-shoots .unnumbered}

"Firstly, Nigrodha, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification.
But they're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they
wished for. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
don't glorify themselves or put others down on account of that. So
they're pure on that point.

They don't become indulgent ...

Furthermore, a mortifier undertakes a practice of mortification. They
generate possessions, honor, and popularity through that mortification.
They're not happy with that, as they still haven't got all they wished
for ...

They don't glorify themselves and put others down on account of
possessions, honor, and popularity ...

They don't become indulgent because of it ... So they're pure on that
point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't become fussy about food, saying, 'This
is acceptable to me, this is not acceptable to me.' What is not
acceptable they give up without expectation. But what is acceptable they
eat without being tied, infatuated, attached, seeing the drawbacks, and
understanding the escape. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't undertake a practice of mortification
out of longing for possessions, honor, and popularity ... 'Kings, royal
ministers, aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and sectarians will
honor me!' So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't rebuke a certain ascetic or brahmin,
'But what is this one doing, living in abundance! According to this
ascetic's doctrine, everything---plants propagated from roots, stems,
cuttings, or joints; and those from regular seeds as the fifth---is
crunched together like the thunder of a tooth-hammer!' So they're pure
on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier sees a certain ascetic or brahmin being
honored, respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. It
never occurs to them, 'This one, who lives in abundance, is honored,
respected, esteemed, and venerated among good families. But I, a fervent
mortifier who lives rough, am not honored, respected, esteemed, and
venerated among good families.' Thus they don't give rise to jealousy
and stinginess regarding families. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sit meditation only when people can see
them. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier doesn't sneak about among families, thinking,
'This is part of my mortification; this is part of my mortification.' So
they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier never behaves in an underhand manner. When
asked whether something is acceptable to them, they say it isn't when it
isn't. Or they say it is when it is. Thus they don't tell a deliberate
lie. So they're pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier agrees with the way that the Realized One or
their disciple teaches Dhamma when they make a valid point. So they're
pure on that point.

Furthermore, a mortifier is not irritable and acrimonious ... offensive
and contemptuous ... jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ...
obstinate and arrogant ... they don't have corrupt wishes ... and wrong
view ... they're not attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go. So they're pure on that point.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the shoots."

#### 2.3. On Reaching the Bark  {#on-reaching-the-bark .unnumbered}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint.[^41] And how is a mortifier restrained in the fourfold
constraint? It's when a mortifier doesn't kill living creatures, doesn't
get others to kill, and doesn't approve of killing.[^42] They don't
steal, get others to steal, or approve of stealing. They don't lie, get
others to lie, or approve of lying. They don't expect rewards from their
practice, they don't lead others to expect rewards, and they don't
approve of expecting rewards.[^43] That's how a mortifier is restrained
in the fourfold constraint.

When a mortifier is restrained in the fourfold constraint, that is their
mortification. They step forward, not falling back. They frequent a
secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a
mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of
straw. After the meal, they return from almsround, sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with
a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving
up ill will and malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will,
full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will.
Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of
dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing
the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse,
they meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside,
cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they
meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful
qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of
compassion ... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ...
They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the bark."

#### 2.4. On Reaching the Softwood  {#on-reaching-the-softwood .unnumbered}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"No, Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin
has not yet reached the peak and the pith. Rather, it has only reached
the softwood."

### 3. On Reaching the Heartwood  {#on-reaching-the-heartwood .unnumbered}

"But at what point, sir, does the fervent mortification in disgust of
sin reach the peak and the pith? Please help me reach the peak and the
pith!"

"Nigrodha, take a mortifier who is restrained in the fourfold
constraint. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love
... equanimity ... They recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

What do you think, Nigrodha? If this is so, is the fervent mortification
in disgust of sin purified or not?"

"Clearly, sir, it is purified. It has reached the peak and the pith."

"Nigrodha, at this point the fervent mortification in disgust of sin has
reached the peak and the pith. Nigrodha, remember you said this to me:
'Sir, what teaching do you use to guide your disciples, through which
they claim solace in the fundamental purpose of the spiritual life?'
Well, there is something better and finer than this. That's what I use
to guide my disciples, through which they claim solace in the
fundamental purpose of the spiritual life."

When he said this, those wanderers made an uproar, "In that case, we're
lost, and so is our tradition! We don't know anything better or finer
than that!"

### 4. Nigrodha Feels Depressed  {#nigrodha-feels-depressed .unnumbered}

Then the householder [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} realized, "Obviously, now
these wanderers want to listen to what the Buddha says. They're actively
listening and trying to understand!"

So he said to the wanderer Nigrodha, "Honorable Nigrodha, remember you
said this to me: 'Surely, householder, you should know better! With whom
does the ascetic Gotama converse? With whom does he engage in
discussion? With whom does he achieve lucidity of wisdom? Staying in
empty huts has destroyed the ascetic Gotama's wisdom. Not frequenting
assemblies, he is unable to hold a discussion. He just lurks on the
periphery. He's just like a one-eyed cow, circling around and lurking on
the periphery. Please, householder, let the ascetic Gotama come to this
assembly. I'll sink him with just one question! I'll roll him over and
wrap him up like a hollow pot!' Now the Blessed One, perfected and fully
awakened, has arrived here. Why don't you send him out of the assembly
to the periphery like a one-eyed cow? Why don't you sink him with just
one question? Why don't you roll him over and wrap him up like a hollow
pot?" When he said this, Nigrodha sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Is it really true, Nigrodha---are
those your words?"

"It's true, sir, those are my words. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me."

"What do you think, Nigrodha? Have you heard that wanderers of the past
who were elderly and senior, the tutors of tutors, said that when the
perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the past came together,
they made an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all
kinds of low topics, like you do in your tradition these days? Or did
they say that the Buddhas frequented remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the madding crowd,
remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat, like I do these
days?"

"I have heard that wanderers of the past who were elderly and senior,
said that when the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas of the
past came together, they didn't make an uproar, like I do in my
tradition these days. They said that the Buddhas of the past frequented
remote lodgings in the wilderness, like the Buddha does these days."

"Nigrodha, you are a sensible and mature man. Did it not occur to you:
'The Blessed One is awakened, tamed, serene, crossed over, and quenched.
And he teaches Dhamma for awakening, taming, serenity, crossing over,
and extinguishment'?"

### 5. The Culmination of the Spiritual Path  {#the-culmination-of-the-spiritual-path .unnumbered}

Nigrodha said, "I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of me to speak in that way. Please, sir, accept my mistake
for what it is, so I will restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Nigrodha, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to speak in that way. But since you have recognized
your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept
it. For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a
mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint
in the future. Nigrodha, this is what I say:

Let a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven years. They will live having achieved with their own insight the
goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. Let alone seven years. Let a sensible person
come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of integrity. I teach and
instruct them. By practicing as instructed they will realize the supreme
end of the spiritual path in this very life, in six years ... five years
... four years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven
months ... six months ... five months ... four months ... three months
... two months ... one month ... a fortnight. Let alone a fortnight. Let
a sensible person come---neither devious nor deceitful, a person of
integrity. I teach and instruct them. By practicing as instructed they
will realize the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life, in
seven days.

### 6. The Wanderers Feel Depressed  {#the-wanderers-feel-depressed .unnumbered}

Nigrodha, you might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because
he wants pupils.' But you should not see it like this. Let your tutor
remain your tutor.[^44]

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our recitation.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your recitation remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to give up our livelihood.' But you should not see it like this. Let
your livelihood remain as it is.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to start doing things that are unskillful and considered unskillful
in our tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things
that are unskillful and considered unskillful in your tradition remain
as they are.

You might think, 'The ascetic Gotama speaks like this because he wants
us to stop doing things that are skillful and considered skillful in our
tradition.' But you should not see it like this. Let those things that
are skillful and considered skillful in your tradition remain as they
are.

I do not speak for any of these reasons. Nigrodha, there are things that
are unskillful, corrupting, leading to future lives, hurtful, resulting
in suffering and future rebirth, old age, and death. I teach Dhamma so
that those things may be given up. When you practice accordingly,
corrupting qualities will be given up in you and cleansing qualities
will grow. You'll enter and remain in the fullness and abundance of
wisdom, having realized it with your own insight in this very life."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, as if their minds
were possessed by [Māra]{lang="sa"}. Then the Buddha thought,[^45] "All
these silly people have been touched by the Wicked One! For not even a
single one thinks, 'Come, let us lead the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama for the sake of enlightenment---for what do seven days
matter?'"

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar in the lady
[Udumbarikā]{lang="sa"}'s monastery for wanderers, rose into the air and
landed on Vulture's Peak. Meanwhile, the householder
[Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} went right back to [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}.

## N 26 The Wheel-Turning Monarch  *Cakkavattisutta* {#n-26-the-wheel-turning-monarch-cakkavattisutta .unnumbered}

### 1. Taking Refuge in Oneself  {#taking-refuge-in-oneself .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Magadhans at [Mātulā]{lang="sa"}.[^46] There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.[^47] And how does a mendicant do this? They meditate observing
an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a mendicant lives
as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That's how
they let the teaching be their island and their refuge, with no other
refuge.

You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your
fathers.[^48] If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your
fathers, [Māra]{lang="sa"} won't catch you or get hold of you. It is due
to undertaking skillful qualities that merit grows.[^49]

### 2. King [Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"}  {#king-daḷhanemi .unnumbered}

Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a king named
[Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"} who was a wheel-turning monarch, a just and
principled king. His dominion extended to all four sides, he achieved
stability in the country, and he possessed the seven treasures.[^50] He
had the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the horse,
the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh
treasure. He had over a thousand sons who were valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigned by principle, without rod or sword.

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King [Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"} addressed one of his men, 'My good
man, when you see that the heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from
its place, please tell me.'[^51]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

After many thousand years had passed, that man saw that the heavenly
wheel-treasure had receded back from its place. So he went to King
[Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"} and said, 'Please sire, you should know that your
heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place.'

So the king summoned the crown prince and said, 'Dear prince, my
heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place. I've heard that
when this happens to a wheel-turning monarch, he does not have long to
live. I have enjoyed human pleasures. Now it is time for me to seek
heavenly pleasures.[^52] Come, dear prince, rule this land surrounded by
ocean! I shall shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

And so, after carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, King
[Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"} shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher
robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.[^53] Seven days
later the heavenly wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. He
went to the royal sage and said, 'Please sire, you should know that the
heavenly wheel-treasure has vanished.'

When he said this, the royal sage said to him, 'Don't be unhappy at the
vanishing of the wheel-treasure. My dear, the wheel-treasure is not
inherited from your father.[^54] Come now, my dear, proceed in the noble
duty of a wheel-turning monarch.[^55] If you do so, it's possible
that---on a fifteenth day sabbath, having bathed your head and gone
upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the sabbath---the heavenly
wheel-treasure will appear to you, with a thousand spokes, with rim and
hub, complete in every detail.'

#### 2.1. The Noble Duty of a Wheel-Turning Monarch  {#the-noble-duty-of-a-wheel-turning-monarch .unnumbered}

'But sire, what is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch?'

'Well then, my dear, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting,
and venerating principle, having principle as your flag, banner, and
authority---provide just protection and security for your court, troops,
aristocrats, vassals, brahmins and householders, people of town and
country, ascetics and brahmins, beasts and birds.[^56] Do not let
injustice prevail in the realm.[^57] Provide money to the penniless in
the realm.[^58]

And there are ascetics and brahmins in the realm who refrain from
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves. From time to time you should
go up to them and ask and learn:[^59] "Sirs, what is skillful? What is
unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless? What should be
cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what leads to my
lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting welfare and
happiness?" Having heard them, you should reject what is unskillful and
undertake and follow what is skillful.

This is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.'

#### 2.2. The Wheel-Treasure Appears  {#the-wheel-treasure-appears .unnumbered}

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the new king to the royal sage. And he
proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.

While he was proceeding in that duty, on a fifteenth day sabbath, he had
bathed his head and gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the
sabbath. And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to him, with a
thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every detail. Seeing
this, the king thought, 'I have heard that when the heavenly
wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?'

Then the anointed king, rising from his seat and arranging his robe over
one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and besprinkled
the wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying, 'Roll forth, O
wheel-treasure! Triumph, O wheel-treasure!'

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed
it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with
his army. And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to the
wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come, great king! Welcome, great king!
We are yours, great king, instruct us.' The wheel-turning monarch said,
'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual
misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the current level
of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the eastern quarter became
his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolled towards the south. ... Having plunged into the
southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled towards the west. ...

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four
divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the
king came to stay together with his army. And any opposing rulers of the
northern quarter came to the wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come,
great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.'
The wheel-turning monarch said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not
steal. Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor.
Maintain the current level of taxation.' And so the rulers of the
northern quarter became his vassals.

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the
gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle,
illuminating the royal compound.

### 3. On Subsequent Wheel-Turning Monarchs  {#on-subsequent-wheel-turning-monarchs .unnumbered}

And for a second time, and a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and a
seventh time, a wheel-turning monarch was established in exactly the
same way. And after many years the seventh wheel-turning monarch went
forth, handing the realm over to the crown prince.

Seven days later the heavenly wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. But
he didn't go to the royal sage and ask about the noble duty of a
wheel-turning monarch. He just governed the country according to his own
ideas.[^60] So governed, the country's people did not prosper like
before, as they had when former kings proceeded in the noble duty of a
wheel-turning monarch.[^61]

Then the ministers and councillors, the finance ministers, military
officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers gathered and said to the
king,[^62] 'Sire, when governed according to your own ideas, the
country's people do not prosper like before, as they did when former
kings proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. In your
realm are found ministers and councillors, finance ministers, military
officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers---both ourselves and
others---who remember the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. Please,
Your Majesty, ask us about the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. We
will answer you.'

### 4. On the Period of Decline  {#on-the-period-of-decline .unnumbered}

So the anointed king asked the assembled ministers and councillors,
finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, and professional
advisers about the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. And they
answered him. After listening to them, he provided just protection and
security. But he did not provide money to the penniless in the
realm.[^63] And so poverty grew widespread.

When poverty was widespread, a certain person stole from others, with
the intention to commit theft.[^64] They arrested him and presented him
to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others with
the intention to commit theft.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others with the intention to commit theft?'[^65]

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven.'[^66]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

But then another man stole something from others. They arrested him and
presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from
others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is providing money to anyone
who steals from others!'[^67] It occurred to them, 'Why don't we steal
from others?' So then another man stole something from others.

They arrested him and presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty,
this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

Then the king thought, 'If I provide money to anyone who steals from
others, it will only increase the stealing. I'd better make an end of
this person, finish him off, and chop off his head.'[^68]

Then he ordered his men, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly
behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from
street to street and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum.
Then take him out the south gate and make an end of him, finish him off,
and chop off his head.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' they replied, and did as he commanded.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is chopping the head off
anyone who steals from others!' It occurred to them, 'We'd better have
sharp swords made. Then when we steal from others, we'll make an end of
them, finish them off, and chop off their heads.'[^69] They had sharp
swords made. Then they started to make raids on villages, towns, and
cities, and to infest the highways. And they chopped the heads off
anyone they stole from.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty
became widespread. When poverty was widespread, theft became widespread.
When theft was widespread, swords became widespread. When swords were
widespread, killing living creatures became widespread. And for the
sentient beings among whom killing was widespread, their lifespan and
beauty declined. Those people lived for 80,000 years, but their children
lived for 40,000 years.[^70]

Among the people who lived for 40,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. They arrested him and presented him to the king,
saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'No, sire,' he said, deliberately lying.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, and killing became widespread. When killing was
widespread, lying became widespread. And for the sentient beings among
whom lying was widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those
people who lived for 40,000 years had children who lived for 20,000
years.

Among the people who lived for 20,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. Someone else reported this to the king, 'Your
Majesty, such-and-such person stole from others,' he said, going behind
his back.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, and lying became widespread. When lying was
widespread, backbiting became widespread. And for the sentient beings
among whom backbiting was widespread, their lifespan and beauty
declined. Those people who lived for 20,000 years had children who lived
for 10,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 10,000 years, some were beautiful, some
were ugly. And the ugly beings, coveting the beautiful ones, committed
adultery with the wives of others.[^71]

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, lying, and backbiting became widespread. When
backbiting was widespread, sexual misconduct became widespread. And for
the sentient beings among whom sexual misconduct was widespread, their
lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived for 10,000 years
had children who lived for 5,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 5,000 years, two things became
widespread: harsh speech and talking nonsense.[^72] For the sentient
beings among whom these two things were widespread, their lifespan and
beauty declined. Those people who lived for 5,000 years had some
children who lived for 2,500 years, while others lived for 2,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 2,500 years, desire and ill will became
widespread. For the sentient beings among whom desire and ill will were
widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived
for 2,500 years had children who lived for 1,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 1,000 years, wrong view became
widespread.[^73] For the sentient beings among whom wrong view was
widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived
for 1,000 years had children who lived for five hundred years.

Among the people who lived for five hundred years, three things became
widespread: illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong custom.[^74] For
the sentient beings among whom these three things were widespread, their
lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived for five hundred
years had some children who lived for two hundred and fifty years, while
others lived for two hundred years.

Among the people who lived for two hundred and fifty years, these things
became widespread: lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics
and brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, all these
things became widespread---poverty, theft, swords, killing, lying,
backbiting, sexual misconduct, harsh speech and talking nonsense, desire
and ill will, wrong view, illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong
custom, and lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics and
brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family. For the
sentient beings among whom these things were widespread, their lifespan
and beauty declined. Those people who lived for two hundred and fifty
years had children who lived for a hundred years.[^75]

### 5. When People Live for Ten Years  {#when-people-live-for-ten-years .unnumbered}

There will come a time, mendicants, when these people will have children
who live for ten years.[^76] Among the people who live for ten years,
girls will be marriageable at five.[^77] The following flavors will
disappear: ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt. The best kind
of food will be finger millet,[^78] just as fine rice with meat is the
best kind of food today.[^79]

The ten ways of doing skillful deeds will totally disappear, and the ten
ways of doing unskillful deeds will explode in popularity.[^80] Those
people will not even have the word 'skillful', still less anyone who
does what is skillful.[^81] And anyone who disrespects mother and
father, ascetics and brahmins, and fails to honor the elders in the
family will be venerated and praised, just as the opposite is venerated
and praised today.

There'll be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or wives and
partners of tutors and respected people.[^82] The world will become
dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals.[^83]

They'll be full of hostility towards each other, with acute ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of murder. Even a mother will feel like this
for her child, and the child for its mother, father for child, child for
father, brother for sister, and sister for brother. They'll be just like
a deer hunter when he sees a deer---full of hostility, ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of killing.

Among the people who live for ten years, there will be an interregnum of
swords lasting seven days.[^84] During that time they will see each
other as beasts.[^85] Sharp swords will appear in their hands, with
which they'll take each other's life, crying, 'It's a beast! It's a
beast!'

But then some of those beings will think, 'Let us neither kill nor be
killed! Why don't we hide in thick grass, thick jungle, thick trees,
inaccessible riverlands, or rugged mountains and survive on forest roots
and fruits?'[^86] So that's what they do.

When those seven days have passed, having emerged from their hiding
places and embraced each other, they will come together and cry in one
voice,[^87] 'Fantastic, dear foe, you live! Fantastic, dear foe, you
live!'[^88]

### 6. The Period of Growth  {#the-period-of-growth .unnumbered}

Then those beings will think, 'It's because we undertook unskillful
things that we suffered such an extensive loss of our relatives. We'd
better do what's skillful. What skillful thing should we do? Why don't
we refrain from killing living creatures? Having undertaken this
skillful thing we'll live by it.'[^89] So that's what they do. Because
of undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty will grow.
Those people who live for ten years will have children who live for
twenty years.

Then those beings will think, 'Because of undertaking this skillful
thing, our lifespan and beauty are growing. Why don't we do even more
skillful things? What skillful thing should we do? Why don't we refrain
from stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying ... backbiting ... harsh
speech ... and talking nonsense. Why don't we give up covetousness ...
ill will ... wrong view ... three things: illicit desire, immoral greed,
and wrong custom. Why don't we pay due respect to mother and father,
ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in our families? Having
undertaken this skillful thing we'll live by it.' So that's what they
do.

Because of undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty
will grow. Those people who live for twenty years will have children who
live for forty years. Those people who live for forty years will have
children who live for eighty years, then a hundred and sixty years,
three hundred and twenty years, six hundred and forty years, 2,000
years, 4,000 years, 8,000 years, 20,000 years, 40,000 years, and finally
80,000 years. Among the people who live for 80,000 years, girls will be
marriageable at five hundred.

### 7. The Time of King [Saṅkha]{lang="sa"}  {#the-time-of-king-saṅkha .unnumbered}

Among the people who live for 80,000 years, there will be just three
afflictions: greed, starvation, and old age.[^90] The Black Plum Tree
Land will be successful and prosperous. The villages, towns, and capital
cities will be no more than a chicken's flight apart. And the land will
be so full of people you'd think they were squashed together, like a
thicket of rushes or reeds. The royal capital will be Varanasi, renamed
[Ketumatī]{lang="sa"}. And it will be successful, prosperous, populous,
full of people, with plenty of food.[^91] There will be 84,000 cities in
the Black Plum Tree Land, with the royal capital of
[Ketumatī]{lang="sa"} foremost.

And in the royal capital of [Ketumatī]{lang="sa"} a king named
[Saṅkha]{lang="sa"} will arise, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and
principled king. His dominion will extend to all four sides, he will
achieve stability in the country, and possess the seven treasures.[^92]
He will have the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the
horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the
seventh treasure. He will have over a thousand sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land
girt by sea, he will reign by principle, without rod or sword.

### 8. The Arising of the Buddha Metteyya  {#the-arising-of-the-buddha-metteyya .unnumbered}

And the Blessed One named Metteyya will arise in the world---perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed---[^93] just as I have arisen
today.[^94] He will realize with his own insight this world---with its
gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and make it known to others,
just as I do today. He will teach the Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he will reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure, just as I do today. He will lead a [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of
many thousand mendicants, just as I lead a [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of many
hundreds today.[^95]

Then King [Saṅkha]{lang="sa"} will have the sacrificial post once built
by King [Mahāpanāda]{lang="sa"} raised up.[^96] Having reigned, he will
abdicate, offering charity to ascetics and brahmins, paupers, vagrants,
supplicants, and beggars. Then, having shaved off his hair and beard and
dressed in ocher robes, he will go forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the Buddha Metteyya's presence.[^97] Soon after going
forth, living withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, he will realize
the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He will live
having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge. And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no
other refuge. That's how they let the teaching be their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

### 9. On Long Life and Beauty for Mendicants  {#on-long-life-and-beauty-for-mendicants .unnumbered}

Mendicants, you should roam inside your own territory, the domain of
your fathers. Doing so, you will grow in lifespan, beauty, happiness,
wealth, and power.

And what is long life for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. Having developed and cultivated these
four bases of psychic power they may, if they wish, live for the proper
lifespan or what's left of it. This is long life for a mendicant.

And what is beauty for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is beauty for a
mendicant.

And what is happiness for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. This is happiness for a mendicant.

And what is wealth for a mendicant? It's when a monk meditates spreading
a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ...
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
This is wealth for a mendicant.

And what is power for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is power for a mendicant.

Mendicants, I do not see a single power so hard to defeat as the power
of [Māra]{lang="sa"}. It is due to undertaking skillful qualities that
merit grows."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 27 What Came First  *Aggaññasutta* {#n-27-what-came-first-aggaññasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^98]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery.[^99]

Now at that time [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} were
living on probation among the mendicants in hopes of being
ordained.[^100] Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came downstairs
from the longhouse and was walking mindfully in the open air, beneath
the shade of the longhouse.

[Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} saw him[^101] and said to [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"},
"Reverend [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"}, the Buddha is walking mindfully in
the open air, beneath the shade of the longhouse. Come, reverend, let's
go to the Buddha. Hopefully we'll get to hear a Dhamma talk from him."

"Yes, reverend," replied [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"}.

So they went to the Buddha, bowed, and walked beside him.

Then the Buddha said to [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, "[Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"},
you are both brahmins by birth and family, and have gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness from a brahmin family. I hope you don't have to
suffer abuse and insults from the brahmins."

"Actually, sir, the brahmins do insult and abuse us with their typical
insults to the fullest extent."

"But how do the brahmins insult you?"

"Sir, the brahmins say: 'Only brahmins are the best class; other classes
are inferior.[^102] Only brahmins are the light class; other classes are
dark.[^103] Only brahmins are purified, not others.[^104] Only brahmins
are the Divinity's true-born sons, born from his mouth, born of the
Divinity, created by the Divinity, heirs of the Divinity. You've both
abandoned the best class to join an inferior class, namely these
shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives, black spawn from the feet of our
kinsman.[^105] This is not right, it's not proper!' That's how the
brahmins insult us."

"Actually, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, the brahmins are forgetting their
tradition when they say this to you. For brahmin women are seen
menstruating, being pregnant, giving birth, and breast-feeding.[^106]
Yet even though they're born from a brahmin womb they say: 'Only
brahmins are the best class; other classes are inferior. Only brahmins
are the light class; other classes are dark. Only brahmins are purified,
not others. Only brahmins are the Divinity's true-born sons, born from
his mouth, born of the Divinity, created by the Divinity, heirs of the
Divinity.' They misrepresent the brahmins, speak falsely, and create
much wickedness.

### 1. Purification in the Four Classes  {#purification-in-the-four-classes .unnumbered}

[Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, there are these four classes: aristocrats,
brahmins, peasants, and menials. Some aristocrats kill living creatures,
steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, and nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with
wrong view. These things are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be
cultivated, unworthy of the noble ones---and are reckoned as such. They
are dark deeds with dark results, criticized by sensible people. Such
things are exhibited in some aristocrats.[^107] And they are also seen
among some brahmins, peasants, and menials.

But some aristocrats refrain from killing living creatures, stealing,
and committing sexual misconduct. They refrain from speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, and nonsensical. And they're content, kind-hearted,
with right view. These things are skillful, blameless, to be cultivated,
worthy of the noble ones---and are reckoned as such. They are bright
deeds with bright results, praised by sensible people. Such things are
exhibited in some aristocrats. And they are also seen among some
brahmins, peasants, and menials.

Both these things occur like this, mixed up in these four classes---the
dark and the bright, that which is praised and that which is criticized
by sensible people. Yet of this the brahmins say: 'Only brahmins are the
best class; other classes are inferior. Only brahmins are the light
class; other classes are dark. Only brahmins are purified, not others.
Only brahmins are the Divinity's true-born sons, born from his mouth,
born of the Divinity, created by the Divinity, heirs of the Divinity.'

Sensible people don't acknowledge this. Why is that? Because any
mendicant from these four classes who is perfected---with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment---is said to be foremost by virtue of principle, not
against principle.[^108] For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the
best thing for people in both this life and the next.

And here's a way to understand how this is so.

King Pasenadi of Kosala knows that the ascetic Gotama has gone forth
from the neighboring clan of the Sakyans. And the Sakyans are his
vassals.[^109] The Sakyans show deference to King Pasenadi by bowing
down, rising up, greeting him with joined palms, and observing proper
etiquette for him. Now, King Pasenadi shows the same kind of deference
to the Realized One. But he doesn't think: 'The ascetic Gotama is
well-born, I am ill-born.[^110] He is powerful, I am weak. He is
handsome, I am ugly. He is influential, I am insignificant.' Rather, in
showing such deference to the Realized One he is only honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle. And here's another way to
understand how principle is the best thing for people in both this life
and the next.

[Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, you have different births, names, clans, and
families, yet have gone forth from the lay life to homelessness.[^111]
When they ask you what you are, you claim to be ascetics who follow the
Sakyan. But only when someone has faith in the Realized One---settled,
rooted, and planted deep, strong, not to be shifted by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or [Māra]{lang="sa"} or divinity or by anyone in the
world---is it appropriate for them to say: 'I am the Buddha's true-born
son, born from his mouth, born of principle, created by principle, heir
to principle.'[^112] Why is that? For these are terms for the Realized
One: 'the embodiment of principle', and 'the embodiment of divinity',
and 'the manifestation of principle', and 'the manifestation of
divinity'.[^113]

There comes a time when, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, after a very long period
has passed, this cosmos contracts.[^114] As the cosmos contracts,
sentient beings are mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance.
There they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering
in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long
time.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos expands. As the cosmos expands, sentient beings mostly pass away
from that host of radiant deities and come back to this realm.[^115]
Here they are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in
midair, steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long
time.[^116]

### 2. The Earth's Nectar Appears  {#the-earths-nectar-appears .unnumbered}

But the single mass of water at that time was utterly dark.[^117] The
moon and sun were not found, nor were stars and constellations, day and
night, months and fortnights, years and seasons, or male and female.
Beings were simply known as 'beings'.[^118] After a very long period had
passed, the earth's nectar curdled in the water.[^119] It appeared just
like the curd on top of hot milk-rice as it cools. It was beautiful,
fragrant, and delicious, like ghee or butter. And it was as sweet as
pure dwarf-bee honey.[^120] Now, one of those beings was reckless.
Thinking, 'Oh my, what might this be?' they tasted the earth's nectar
with their finger.[^121] They enjoyed it, and craving was born in
them.[^122] And other beings, following that being's example, tasted the
earth's nectar with their fingers. They too enjoyed it, and craving was
born in them.

### 3. The Moon and Sun Appear  {#the-moon-and-sun-appear .unnumbered}

Then those beings started to eat the earth's nectar, breaking it into
lumps. But when they did this their luminosity vanished. And with the
vanishing of their luminosity the moon and sun appeared, stars and
constellations appeared, days and nights were distinguished, and so were
months and fortnights, and years and seasons. So far had the world
evolved once more.

Then those beings eating the earth's nectar, with that as their food and
nourishment, remained for a very long time. But so long as they ate that
earth's nectar, their bodies became more solid and they diverged in
appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful beings looked
down on the ugly ones:[^123] 'We're more beautiful, they're the ugly
ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the earth's nectar
vanish. They gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, what a taste! Oh, what
a taste!' And even today when people get something tasty they say: 'Oh,
what a taste! Oh, what a taste!' They're just remembering an ancient
primordial saying, but they don't understand what it means.[^124]

### 4. Ground-Fungus  {#ground-fungus .unnumbered}

When the earth's nectar had vanished, ground-fungus appeared to those
beings.[^125] It appeared just like a mushroom. It was beautiful,
fragrant, and delicious, like ghee or butter. And it was as sweet as
pure dwarf-bee honey.

Then those beings started to eat the ground-fungus. With that as their
food and nourishment, they remained for a very long time. But so long as
they ate that ground-fungus, their bodies became more solid and they
diverged in appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful
beings looked down on the ugly ones: 'We're more beautiful, they're the
ugly ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the ground-fungus
vanish.

### 5. Bursting Pods  {#bursting-pods .unnumbered}

When the ground-fungus had vanished, bursting pods appeared, like the
fruit of the kadam tree.[^126] They were beautiful, fragrant, and
delicious, like ghee or butter. And they were as sweet as pure dwarf-bee
honey.

Then those beings started to eat the bursting pods. With that as their
food and nourishment, they remained for a very long time. But so long as
they ate those bursting pods, their bodies became more solid and they
diverged in appearance; some beautiful, some ugly. And the beautiful
beings looked down on the ugly ones: 'We're more beautiful, they're the
ugly ones!' And the vanity of the beautiful ones made the bursting pods
vanish.

They gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, what we've lost! Oh, what
we've lost---those bursting pods!' And even today when people experience
suffering they say: 'Oh, what we've lost! Oh, what we've lost!' They're
just remembering an ancient primordial saying, but they don't understand
what it means.

### 6. Ripe Untilled Rice  {#ripe-untilled-rice .unnumbered}

When the bursting pods had vanished, ripe untilled rice appeared to
those beings. It had no powder or husk, pure and fragrant, with only the
rice-grain. What they took for supper in the evening, by the morning had
grown back and ripened. And what they took for breakfast in the morning
had grown back and ripened by the evening, leaving no trace showing.
Then those beings eating the ripe untilled rice, with that as their food
and nourishment, remained for a very long time.

### 7. Sex Appears  {#sex-appears .unnumbered}

But so long as they ate that ripe untilled rice, their bodies became
more solid and they diverged in appearance. And female characteristics
appeared on women, while male characteristics appeared on men.[^127]
Women spent too much time gazing at men, and men at women. They became
lustful, and their bodies burned with fever. Due to this fever they had
sex with each other.

Those who saw them having sex pelted them with dirt, clods, or cow-dung,
saying,[^128] 'Get lost, filth! Get lost, filth![^129] How on earth can
one being do that to another?'[^130] And even today people in some
countries, when carrying a bride off, pelt her with dirt, clods, or
cow-dung.[^131] They're just remembering an ancient primordial saying,
but they don't understand what it means.

### 8. Sexual Intercourse  {#sexual-intercourse .unnumbered}

What was deemed as unprincipled at that time, these days is deemed as
principled.[^132] The beings who had sex together weren't allowed to
enter a village or town for one or two months. Ever since they
excessively threw themselves into immorality, they started to make
buildings to hide their immoral deeds.[^133] Then one of those beings of
idle disposition thought, 'Hey now, why should I be bothered to gather
rice in the evening for supper, and in the morning for breakfast? Why
don't I gather rice for supper and breakfast all at once?'[^134]

So that's what he did. Then one of the other beings approached that
being and said, 'Come, good being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's
no need, good being! I gathered rice for supper and breakfast all at
once.' So that being, following their example, gathered rice for two
days all at once, thinking: 'This seems fine.'[^135]

Then one of the other beings approached that being and said, 'Come, good
being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's no need, good being! I
gathered rice for two days all at once.' So that being, following their
example, gathered rice for four days all at once, thinking: 'This seems
fine.'

Then one of the other beings approached that being and said, 'Come, good
being, we shall go to gather rice.' 'There's no need, good being! I
gathered rice for four days all at once.' So that being, following their
example, gathered rice for eight days all at once, thinking: 'This seems
fine.'

But when they started to store up rice to eat, the rice grains became
wrapped in powder and husk, it didn't grow back after reaping, leaving a
trace showing, and the rice stood in clumps.[^136]

### 9. Dividing the Rice  {#dividing-the-rice .unnumbered}

Then those beings gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, how wicked things
have appeared among beings![^137] For we used to be mind-made, feeding
on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and
we remained like that for a very long time. After a very long period had
passed, the earth's nectar curdled in the water. But due to bad,
unskillful things among us, the earth's nectar vanished, then the
ground-fungus vanished, the bursting pods vanished, and now the rice
grains have become wrapped in powder and husk, it doesn't grow back
after reaping, traces are left showing, and the rice stands in clumps.
We'd better divide up the rice and lay down boundaries.'[^138] So that's
what they did.

Now, one of those beings was reckless. While guarding their own share
they took another's share without it being given, and ate it.[^139]

They grabbed the one who had done this and said, 'You have done a bad
thing, good being, in that while guarding your own share you took
another's share without it being given, and ate it. Do not do such a
thing again.'

'Yes, sirs,' replied that being. But for a second time, and a third time
they did the same thing, and were told not to continue.[^140] And then
they struck that being, some with fists, others with stones, and still
others with rods.[^141] From that day on stealing was found, and blame,
and lying, and the taking up of rods.[^142]

### 10. The Elected King  {#the-elected-king .unnumbered}

Then those beings gathered together and bemoaned, 'Oh, how wicked things
have appeared among beings, in that stealing is found, and blaming and
lying and the taking up of rods! Why don't we elect one being who would
rightly accuse those who deserve it, blame those who deserve it, and
expel those who deserve it?[^143] We shall pay them with a share of
rice.'[^144]

Then those beings approached the being among them who was most
attractive, good-looking, lovely, and illustrious, and said,[^145]
'Come, good being, rightly accuse those who deserve it, blame those who
deserve it, and banish those who deserve it.[^146] We shall pay you with
a share of rice.' 'Yes, sirs,' replied that being. They acted
accordingly, and were paid with a share of rice.

'Elected by the people', [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the meaning of
'elected one', the first term applied to them.[^147]

'Lord of the fields' is the meaning of 'aristocrat', the second term
applied to them.[^148]

'They please others with principle' is the meaning of 'king', the third
term applied to them.[^149]

And that, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is how the ancient primordial terms for
the circle of aristocrats were created; for those very beings, not
others; for those like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not
against principle. For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the best
thing for people in both this life and the next.

### 11. The Circle of Brahmins  {#the-circle-of-brahmins .unnumbered}

Then some of those same beings thought, 'Oh, how wicked things have
appeared among beings, in that stealing is found, and blaming and lying
and the taking up of rods and banishment! Why don't we set aside bad,
unskillful things?'[^150] So that's what they did.

'They set aside bad, unskillful things' is the meaning of 'brahmin', the
first term applied to them.[^151]

They built leaf huts in a wilderness region where they meditated pure
and bright, without lighting cooking fires or digging the soil. They
came down in the morning for breakfast and in the evening for supper to
the village, town, or royal capital seeking a meal.[^152] When they had
obtained food they continued to meditate in the leaf huts.

When people noticed this they said, 'These beings build leaf huts in a
wilderness region where they meditate pure and bright, without lighting
cooking fires or digging the soil. They come down in the morning for
breakfast and in the evening for supper to the village, town, or royal
capital seeking a meal. When they have obtained food they continue to
meditate in the leaf huts.'

'They meditate' is the meaning of 'meditator', the second term applied
to them.[^153]

But some of those beings were unable to keep up with their meditation in
the leaf huts in the wilderness. They came down to the neighborhood of a
village or town where they dwelt compiling texts.[^154]

When people noticed this they said, 'These beings were unable to keep up
with their meditation in the leaf huts in the wilderness. They came down
to the neighborhood of a village or town where they dwelt compiling
texts. Now they don't meditate.'

'Now they don't meditate' is the meaning of 'reciter', the third term
applied to them.[^155] What was deemed as worse at that time, these days
is deemed as best.

And that, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is how the ancient primordial terms for
the circle of brahmins were created; for those very beings, not others;
for those like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against
principle. For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the best thing for
people in both this life and the next.

### 12. The Circle of Peasants  {#the-circle-of-peasants .unnumbered}

Some of those same beings, taking up an active sex life, applied
themselves to various jobs.

'Having taken up an active sex life, they apply themselves to various
jobs' is the meaning of 'peasant', the term applied to them.[^156]

And that, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is how the ancient primordial term for
the circle of peasants was created; for those very beings, not others;
for those like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against
principle. For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the best thing for
people in both this life and the next.

### 13. The Circle of Menials  {#the-circle-of-menials .unnumbered}

The remaining beings lived by venal hunting and minor tasks.

'They live by venal hunting and minor tasks' is the meaning of 'menial',
the term applied to them.[^157]

And that, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is how the ancient primordial term for
the circle of menials was created; for those very beings, not others;
for those like them, not unlike; by virtue of principle, not against
principle. For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the best thing for
people in both this life and the next.

There came a time when an aristocrat,[^158] brahmin, peasant, or menial,
deprecating their own vocation, went forth from the lay life to
homelessness, thinking, 'I will be an ascetic.'

From these four circles, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, the circle of ascetics
was created; for those very beings, not others; for those like them, not
unlike; by virtue of principle, not against principle. For principle,
[Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, is the best thing for people in both this life
and the next.

### 14. On Bad Conduct  {#on-bad-conduct .unnumbered}

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do bad things by
way of body, speech, and mind. They have wrong view, and they act out of
that wrong view. And because of that, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do good things
by way of body, speech, and mind. They have right view, and they act out
of that right view. And because of that, when their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic may do mixed things
by way of body, speech, and mind. They have mixed view, and they act out
of that mixed view. And because of that, when their body breaks up,
after death, they experience both pleasure and pain.

### 15. The Qualities That Lead to Awakening  {#the-qualities-that-lead-to-awakening .unnumbered}

An aristocrat, brahmin, peasant, menial, or ascetic who is restrained in
body, speech, and mind, and develops the seven qualities that lead to
awakening, becomes extinguished in this very life.

Any mendicant from these four classes who is perfected---with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment---is said to be the foremost by virtue of
principle, not against principle. For principle, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"},
is the best thing for people in both this life and the next.

The divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"} also spoke this verse:

> 'The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans.'

That verse was well sung by the Divinity [Sanaṅkumāra]{lang="sa"}, not
poorly sung; well spoken, not poorly spoken; beneficial, not harmful,
and I agree with it.[^159] I also say:

> The aristocrat is best among people\
> who take clan as the standard.\
> But one accomplished in knowledge and conduct\
> is first among gods and humans."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and
[Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} approved what the Buddha said.

## N 28 Inspiring Confidence  *Sampasādanīyasutta* {#n-28-inspiring-confidence-sampasādanīyasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}'s Lion's Roar  {#sāriputtas-lions-roar .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"} in [Pāvārika]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove.[^160] Then
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have such confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no
other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening."

"That's a grand and dramatic statement, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. You've
roared a definitive, categorical lion's roar, saying: 'I have such
confidence in the Buddha that I believe there's no other ascetic or
brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose direct knowledge is
superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening.'

What about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived
in the past? Have you comprehended their minds to know that those
Buddhas had such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such
meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who
will live in the future? Have you comprehended their minds to know that
those Buddhas will have such ethics, or such qualities, or such wisdom,
or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"And what about me, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha at
present? Have you comprehended my mind to know that I have such ethics,
or such qualities, or such wisdom, or such meditation, or such freedom?"

"No, sir."

"Well then, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, given that you don't comprehend the
minds of Buddhas past, future, or present, what exactly are you doing,
making such a grand and dramatic statement, roaring such a definitive,
categorical lion's roar?"

"Sir, though I don't comprehend the minds of Buddhas past, future, and
present, still I understand this by inference from the teaching. Suppose
there were a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and a single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known
people in. As he walks around the patrol path, he doesn't see a hole or
cleft in the wall, not even one big enough for a cat to slip out. They'd
think, 'Whatever sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of
them do so via this gate.'

In the same way, I understand this by inference from the teaching: 'All
the perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas---whether past, future, or
present---give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that
weaken wisdom. Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They correctly develop the seven awakening
factors. And they wake up to the supreme perfect awakening.'

Sir, once I approached the Buddha to listen to the teaching.[^161] He
explained Dhamma with its higher and higher stages, with its better and
better stages, with its dark and bright sides. When I directly knew a
certain principle of those teachings, in accordance with how I was
taught, I came to a conclusion about the teachings. I had confidence in
the Teacher:[^162] 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha. The
teaching is well explained. The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} is practicing well.'

#### 1.1. Teaching Skillful Qualities  {#teaching-skillful-qualities .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches skillful qualities is
unsurpassable. This consists of such skillful qualities as the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases
of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.[^163] By these a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. This is unsurpassable when it
comes to skillful qualities. The Buddha understands this without
exception. There is nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another
ascetic or brahmin might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha
when it comes to skillful qualities.

#### 1.2. Describing the Sense Fields  {#describing-the-sense-fields .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of the sense
fields is unsurpassable. There are these six interior and exterior sense
fields.[^164] The eye and sights, the ear and sounds, the nose and
smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and the mind and
ideas. This is unsurpassable when it comes to describing the sense
fields. The Buddha understands this without exception. There is nothing
to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or brahmin might be
superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it comes to describing
the sense fields.

#### 1.3. The Conception of the Embryo  {#the-conception-of-the-embryo .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the conception of the embryo
is unsurpassable. There are these four kinds of conception.

Firstly, someone is unaware when conceived in their mother's womb,
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
first kind of conception.[^165]

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb, but
unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge. This is the
second kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception.

Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, and aware as they emerge. This is the fourth
kind of conception.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the conception of the embryo.

#### 1.4. Ways of Revealing  {#ways-of-revealing .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different ways of
revealing is unsurpassable. There are these four ways of
revealing.[^166]

Firstly, someone reveals by means of a sign, 'This is what you're
thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And
even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not
otherwise. This is the first way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or non-humans
or deities, 'This is what you're thinking, such is your thought, and
thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this many times, it
turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the second way of
revealing.

Furthermore, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought spreading
as someone thinks and considers, 'This is what you're thinking, such is
your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal
this many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise. This is the
third way of revealing.

Furthermore, someone comprehends the mind of a person who has attained
the immersion that's free of placing the mind and keeping it connected.
They understand, 'Judging by the way this person's intentions are
directed, immediately after this mind state, they'll think this
thought.' And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly
so, not otherwise. This is the fourth way of revealing.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of revealing.

#### 1.5. Attainments of Vision  {#attainments-of-vision .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the attainments of vision is
unsurpassable. There are these four attainments of vision.

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they examine their own body
up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs,
wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth.[^167] 'In this body
there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones,
bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs,
intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood,
sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' This is
the first attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood.[^168] This is the second attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. And they understand of a person that their stream of
consciousness is consistent on both sides: established in both this
world and the next.[^169] This is the third attainment of vision.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin experiences that immersion and
examines their own body. 'In this body there is head hair ... urine.'
Going further, they examine a person's bones with skin, flesh, and
blood. They understand of a person that their stream of consciousness is
consistent on both sides: not established in either this world or the
next. This is the fourth attainment of vision.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to attainments of vision.

#### 1.6. Descriptions of Persons  {#descriptions-of-persons .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the description of persons is
unsurpassable. There are these seven persons. One freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, a follower by faith.[^170] This is
unsurpassable when it comes to the description of persons.

#### 1.7. Kinds of Striving  {#kinds-of-striving .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the kinds of striving is
unsurpassable. There are these seven awakening factors: the awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.[^171] This is unsurpassable when
it comes to the kinds of striving.

#### 1.8. Ways of Practice  {#ways-of-practice .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the ways of practice is
unsurpassable.[^172]

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

Of these, the painful practice with slow insight is said to be inferior
both ways: because it's painful and because it's slow. The painful
practice with swift insight is said to be inferior because it's painful.
The pleasant practice with slow insight is said to be inferior because
it's slow. But the pleasant practice with swift insight is said to be
superior both ways: because it's pleasant and because it's swift.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the ways of practice.

#### 1.9. Behavior in Speech  {#behavior-in-speech .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches behavior in speech is
unsurpassable. It's when someone doesn't use speech that's connected
with lying, or divisive, or backbiting, or aggressively trying to
win.[^173] They speak only wise counsel, valuable and timely. This is
unsurpassable when it comes to behavior in speech.

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches a person's ethical behavior is
unsurpassable.[^174] It's when someone is honest and faithful. They
don't use deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't use
material things to chase after other material things. They guard the
sense doors and eat in moderation. They're fair, dedicated to
wakefulness, tireless, energetic, and meditative. They have good memory,
eloquence, range, retention, and thoughtfulness. They're not greedy for
sensual pleasures. They are mindful and alert.[^175] This is
unsurpassable when it comes to a person's ethical behavior.

#### 1.10. Responsiveness to Instruction  {#responsiveness-to-instruction .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction is unsurpassable. There are these four
degrees of responsiveness to instruction.[^176]

The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual:[^177] 'By practicing as instructed this individual will,
with the ending of three fetters, become a stream-enterer, not liable to
be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'By practicing as
instructed this individual will, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, become a once-returner. They
will come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.'
The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another individual:
'By practicing as instructed this individual will, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, be reborn spontaneously. They will be
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.' The
Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'By
practicing as instructed this individual will realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.'

This is unsurpassable when it comes to the different degrees of
responsiveness to instruction.

#### 1.11. The Knowledge and Freedom of Others  {#the-knowledge-and-freedom-of-others .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge and freedom of
other individuals is unsurpassable.[^178] The Buddha knows by rationally
applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of three
fetters this individual will become a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of
three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, this
individual will become a once-returner. They will come back to this
world once only, then make an end of suffering.' The Buddha knows by
rationally applying the mind to another individual: 'With the ending of
the five lower fetters, this individual will be reborn spontaneously.
They will be extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world.' The Buddha knows by rationally applying the mind to another
individual: 'This individual will realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.' This is
unsurpassable when it comes to the knowledge and freedom of other
individuals.

#### 1.12. Eternalism  {#eternalism .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches eternalist doctrines is
unsurpassable. There are these three eternalist doctrines.[^179]

Firstly, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed,
and diligent effort, and right application of mind---experiences an
immersion of the heart of such a kind that they recollect many hundreds
of thousands of past lives, with features and details. They say, 'I know
that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know whether
in the future the cosmos will expand or contract.[^180] The self and the
cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the first eternalist doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as ten eons of the expansion and
contraction of the cosmos,[^181] with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the second eternalist doctrine.

Furthermore, some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their past lives for as many as forty eons of the expansion
and contraction of the cosmos, with features and details. They say, 'I
know that in the past the cosmos expanded or contracted. I don't know
whether in the future the cosmos will expand or contract. The self and
the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm
like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity, while these
sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and rearise.' This
is the third eternalist doctrine.

This is unsurpassable when it comes to eternalist doctrines.

#### 1.13. Recollecting Past Lives  {#recollecting-past-lives .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of recollecting
past lives is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint
of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application
of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details. Sir, there are gods
whose lifespan cannot be reckoned or calculated. Still, no matter what
incarnation they have previously been reborn in---whether formed or
formless or percipient or non-percipient or neither percipient nor
non-percipient---they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. This is unsurpassable when it comes to the
knowledge of recollecting past lives.

#### 1.14. Death and Rebirth  {#death-and-rebirth .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches the knowledge of the death and
rebirth of sentient beings is unsurpassable. It's when some ascetic or
brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and
right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn--- inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is unsurpassable when
it comes to the knowledge of death and rebirth.

#### 1.15. Psychic Powers  {#psychic-powers .unnumbered}

And moreover, sir, how the Buddha teaches psychic power is
unsurpassable. There are these two kinds of psychic power. There are
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble.[^182] And there are psychic powers that are free
of defilements and attachments, and are said to be noble. What are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble? It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of
keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. These are the
psychic powers that are accompanied by defilements and attachments, and
are said to be ignoble.

But what are the psychic powers that are free of defilements and
attachments, and are said to be noble? It's when, if a mendicant wishes:
'May I meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,' that's
what they do.[^183] If they wish: 'May I meditate perceiving the
repulsive in the unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I
meditate perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive and the
unrepulsive,' that's what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate
perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' that's
what they do. If they wish: 'May I meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' that's
what they do. These are the psychic powers that are free of defilements
and attachments, and are said to be noble. This is unsurpassable when it
comes to psychic powers. The Buddha understands this without exception.
There is nothing to be understood beyond this whereby another ascetic or
brahmin might be superior in direct knowledge to the Buddha when it
comes to psychic powers.

#### 1.16. The Four Absorptions  {#the-four-absorptions .unnumbered}

The Buddha has achieved what should be achieved by a faithful gentleman
by being energetic and strong, by human strength, energy, vigor, and
exertion. The Buddha doesn't indulge in sensual pleasures, which are
low, crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. And he doesn't indulge in
self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and pointless.[^184] He
gets the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when he wants, without trouble or
difficulty.[^185]

#### 1.17. On Being Questioned  {#on-being-questioned .unnumbered}

Sir, if they were to ask me, 'Reverend [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, is there
any other ascetic or brahmin---whether past, future, or present---whose
direct knowledge is superior to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?'
I would tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'Reverend [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, is there
any other ascetic or brahmin---whether past or future---whose direct
knowledge is equal to the Buddha when it comes to awakening?' I would
tell them 'Yes.' But if they were to ask: 'Reverend
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, is there any other ascetic or brahmin at present
whose direct knowledge is equal to the Buddha when it comes to
awakening?' I would tell them 'No.'

But if they were to ask me, 'But why does Venerable
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} grant this in respect of some but not others?' I
would answer them like this,[^186] 'Reverends, I have heard and learned
this in the presence of the Buddha: "The perfected ones, fully awakened
Buddhas of the past were equal in awakening to myself."[^187] And I have
heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: "The perfected
ones, fully awakened Buddhas of the future will be equal in awakening to
myself." And I have also heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: "It's impossible for two perfected ones, fully awakened Buddhas
to arise in the same solar system at the same time."'[^188]

Answering this way, I trust that I repeated what the Buddha has said,
and didn't misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my explanation was
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, in answering this way you repeat what
I've said, and don't misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation
is in line with the teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

### 2. Incredible and Amazing  {#incredible-and-amazing .unnumbered}

When he had spoken, Venerable [Udāyī]{lang="sa"} said to the
Buddha,[^189] "It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has
so few wishes, such contentment, such self-effacement! For even though
the Realized One has such power and might, he will not make a display of
himself. If the wanderers following other religions were to see even a
single one of these qualities in themselves they'd carry around a banner
to that effect. It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! The Realized One has
so few wishes, such contentment, such self-effacement! For even though
the Realized One has such power and might, he will not make a display of
himself."

"See, [Udāyī]{lang="sa"}, how the Realized One has so few wishes, such
contentment, such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One has
such power and might, he will not make a display of himself. If the
wanderers following other religions were to see even a single one of
these qualities in themselves they'd carry around a banner to that
effect. See, [Udāyī]{lang="sa"}, how the Realized One has so few wishes,
such contentment, such self-effacement. For even though the Realized One
has such power and might, he will not make a display of himself."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, "So
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, you should frequently speak this exposition of
the teaching to the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. Though there will
be some silly people who have doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Realized One, when they hear this exposition of the teaching they'll
give up that doubt or uncertainty."

That's how Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} declared his confidence in
the Buddha's presence. And that's why the name of this discussion is
"Inspiring Confidence".

## N 29 An Impressive Discourse  *Pāsādikasutta* {#n-29-an-impressive-discourse-pāsādikasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans in a stilt longhouse in a mango grove belonging to
those Sakyans named [Vedhaññā]{lang="sa"}.[^190]

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} clan had
recently passed away at [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}.[^191] With his passing the
Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling,
and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words:[^192]

"You don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this
teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training?
You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you
don't. You said last what you should have said first. You said first
what you should have said last. What you've thought so much about has
been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine!
You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics.[^193] And the Jain [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}'s white-clothed lay
disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain
ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with
broken monument and without a refuge.[^194]

And then, after completing the rainy season residence near
[Pāvā]{lang="sa"}, the novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at
[Sāma]{lang="sa"} village. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told him
what had happened.[^195]

Ānanda said to him, "Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this
matter. Come, let's go to the Buddha and tell him about this."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda.

Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened.

### 1. The Teaching of the Unawakened  {#the-teaching-of-the-unawakened .unnumbered}

"That's what happens, Cunda, when a teaching and training is poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.[^196]

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching does not practice in line with the teachings,
does not practice following that procedure, does not live in line with
the teaching. They proceed having turned away from that teaching.[^197]
You should say this to them, 'You're fortunate, reverend, you're so very
fortunate! For your teacher is not awakened, and their teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. But you
don't practice in line with that teaching, you don't practice following
that procedure, you don't live in line with the teaching. You proceed
having turned away from that teaching.' In such a case the teacher and
the teaching are to blame, but the disciple deserves praise.[^198]
Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Come on, venerable,
practice as taught and pointed out by your teacher.' The one who
encourages, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much wickedness.[^199] Why is that? It's because
that teaching and training is poorly explained and poorly propounded,
not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not
a fully awakened Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching practices in line with the teachings,
practices following that procedure, lives in line with the teaching.
They proceed having undertaken that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is not awakened, and their teaching is poorly explained and poorly
propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. And you practice in line
with that teaching, you practice following that procedure, you live in
line with the teaching. You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In
such a case the teacher, the teaching, and the disciple are all to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the
venerable is practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.'
The one who praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being
praised, rouses up even more energy all create much wickedness. Why is
that? It's because that teaching and training is poorly explained and
poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.

### 2. The Teaching of the Awakened  {#the-teaching-of-the-awakened .unnumbered}

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching does not practice in line with the teachings, does not practice
following that procedure, does not live in line with the teaching. They
proceed having turned away from that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. But you don't practice in line with that teaching, you
don't practice following that procedure, you don't live in line with the
teaching. You proceed having turned away from that teaching.' In such a
case the teacher and the teaching deserve praise, but the disciple is to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Come on,
venerable, practice as taught and pointed out by your teacher.' The one
who encourages, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much merit. Why is that? It's because that
teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching practices in line with the teachings, practices following that
procedure, lives in line with the teaching. They proceed having
undertaken that teaching. You should say this to them, 'You're
fortunate, reverend, you're so very fortunate! For your teacher is
awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. And you practice in line with that teaching, you
practice following that procedure, you live in line with the teaching.
You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In such a case the
teacher, the teaching, and the disciple all deserve praise. Suppose
someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the venerable is
practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.' The one who
praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being praised, rouses
up even more energy all create much merit. Why is that? It's because
that teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

### 3. When Disciples Have Regrets  {#when-disciples-have-regrets .unnumbered}

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. But the disciples have not been educated in the meaning
of that good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure has not been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have
not all been collected; and it has not been well proclaimed with its
demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and humans.[^200] And then
their teacher passes away. When such a teacher has passed away the
disciples are tormented by regrets. Why is that? They think: 'Our
teacher was perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. His teaching was well
explained, but we were not educated in its meaning. And the spiritual
practice was not fully disclosed and revealed to us; its sayings have
not all been collected; and it has not been well proclaimed with its
demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and humans. And then our
teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has passed away the disciples
are tormented by regrets.

### 4. When Disciples Have No Regrets  {#when-disciples-have-no-regrets .unnumbered}

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. The disciples have been educated in the meaning of that
good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure
has been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have all been
collected; and it has been well proclaimed with its demonstrable basis
wherever there are gods and humans. And then their teacher passes away.
When such a teacher has passed away the disciples are free of regrets.
Why is that? They think: 'Our teacher was perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha. His teaching was well explained, we were educated in its
meaning, and the spiritual practice was fully disclosed to us. And then
our teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has passed away the
disciples are free of regrets.

### 5. On the Incomplete Spiritual Path, Etc.  {#on-the-incomplete-spiritual-path-etc. .unnumbered}

Now suppose, Cunda, that a spiritual path possesses those factors. But
the teacher is not senior, long standing, long gone forth, advanced in
years, and reached the final stage of life. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior. But there are no senior monk disciples who are
competent, educated, assured, have attained sanctuary from the
yoke,[^201] who can rightly explain the true teaching, and who can
legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up,
and teach with a demonstrable basis. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, then that spiritual path is
complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior and there are competent senior monks. But there are no
competent middle monks, junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior
nuns, celibate white-clothed laymen, white-clothed laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate white-clothed laywomen, white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures. ... There are white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures, but the spiritual path is not
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans ... the spiritual path is
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans, but it has not reached
the peak of material things and fame. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, middle monks, junior monks,
senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen, laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, laywomen enjoying sensual
pleasures, and the spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans, and it has reached the peak of material things and
fame, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

I, Cunda, am a teacher who has arisen in the world today, perfected and
fully awakened. The teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is fully
awakened. My disciples have been educated in the meaning of that good
teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure has
been disclosed and revealed to them with all its collected sayings, with
its demonstrable basis, well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans. I am a teacher today who is senior, long standing, long gone
forth, advanced in years, and have reached the final stage of life.

I have today disciples who are competent senior monks, middle monks,
junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen,
laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, and laywomen
enjoying sensual pleasures. Today my spiritual path is successful and
prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever
there are gods and humans.

Of all the teachers in the world today, Cunda, I don't see even a single
one who has reached the peak of material things and fame like me. Of all
the spiritual communities and groups in the world today, Cunda, I don't
see even a single one who has reached the pinnacle of material things
and fame like the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. And if there's any
spiritual path of which it may be rightly said that it's endowed with
all good qualities, complete in all good qualities, neither too little
nor too much, well explained, whole, full, and well propounded, it's of
this spiritual path that this should be said.

Uddaka son of [Rāma]{lang="sa"} used to say:[^202] 'Seeing, one does not
see.' But seeing what does one not see? You can see the blade of a
well-sharpened razor, but not the edge.[^203] Thus it is said: 'Seeing,
one does not see.'[^204] But that saying of Uddaka's is low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless, as it's only about a razor. If there's
anything of which it may be rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see,'
it's of this that it should be said. Seeing what does one not see? One
sees this: a spiritual path endowed with all good qualities, complete in
all good qualities, neither too little nor too much, well explained,
whole, full, and well propounded. One does not see this: anything that,
were it to be removed, would make it purer. One does not see this:
anything that, were it to be added, would make it more complete. Thus it
is rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see.'

### 6. Teachings Should be Recited in Concert  {#teachings-should-be-recited-in-concert .unnumbered}

So, Cunda, you should all come together and recite in concert, without
disputing, those things I have taught you from my direct knowledge,
comparing meaning with meaning and phrasing with phrasing, so that this
spiritual path may last for a long time. That would be for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.[^205] And what are
those things I have taught from my direct knowledge? They are the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases
of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.[^206] These are the
things I have taught from my own direct knowledge.

### 7. Reaching Agreement  {#reaching-agreement .unnumbered}

Suppose one of those spiritual companions who is training in harmony and
mutual appreciation, without disputing, were to recite the teaching in
the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. Now, you might think, 'This venerable
misconstrues the meaning and mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither
approve nor dismiss them, but say,[^207] 'Reverend, if this is the
meaning, the phrasing may either be this or that: which is more fitting?
And if this is the phrasing, the meaning may be either this or that:
which is more fitting?'[^208] Suppose they reply, 'This phrasing fits
the meaning better than that. And this meaning fits the phrasing better
than that.' Without flattering or rebuking them, you should carefully
convince them by examining that meaning and that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. Now, you might think, 'This venerable misconstrues
the meaning but gets the phrasing right.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the phrasing, the meaning
may be either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose they reply,
'This meaning fits the phrasing better than that.' Without flattering or
rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining that meaning.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the
meaning correctly but mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither approve
nor dismiss them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the meaning, the
phrasing may be either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose
they reply, 'This phrasing fits the meaning better than that.' Without
flattering or rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining
that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the
meaning correctly and gets the phrasing right.' Saying 'Good!' you
should express approval and appreciation of that mendicant's statement,
and then say to them, 'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to
see a venerable such as yourself, so well-versed in the meaning and the
phrasing, as one of our spiritual companions!'

### 8. The Reasons for Allowing Requisites  {#the-reasons-for-allowing-requisites .unnumbered}

Cunda, I do not teach you solely for restraining defilements that affect
this life. Nor do I teach solely for protecting against defilements that
affect lives to come. I teach both for restraining defilements that
affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to
come.

And that's why I have allowed robes for you that suffice[^209] only for
the sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of
flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; and for covering up the
private parts. I have allowed almsfood for you that suffices only to
sustain this body, avoid harm, and support spiritual practice; so that
you will put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new
discomfort, and will keep on living blamelessly and at ease. I have
allowed lodgings for you that suffice only for the sake of warding off
cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind,
sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and to enjoy retreat. I
have allowed medicines and supplies for the sick for you that suffice
only for the sake of warding off the pains of illness and to promote
good health.

### 9. Indulgence in Pleasure  {#indulgence-in-pleasure .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure.'[^210] You should say
to them, 'What is that indulgence in pleasure? For there are many
different kinds of indulgence in pleasure.'

These four kinds of indulgence in pleasure, Cunda, are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
What four?

It's when some fool makes themselves happy and pleased by killing living
creatures. This is the first kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by theft. This
is the second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by lying. This
is the third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone amuses themselves, supplied and provided with the
five kinds of sensual stimulation. This is the fourth kind of indulgence
in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure that are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Not so!' It isn't right to say that about you; it
misrepresents you with an untruth.

Cunda, these four kinds of indulgence in pleasure lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.[^211] What four?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is the first kind of indulgence in
pleasure.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is the
second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is the
third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This
is the fourth kind of indulgence in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure which lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Exactly so!' It's right to say that about you; it
doesn't misrepresent you with an untruth.

### 10. The Benefits of Indulgence in Pleasure  {#the-benefits-of-indulgence-in-pleasure .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'How many
fruits and benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four ways?' You should say to them, 'Four benefits may
be expected by those who live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.
What four?

Firstly, with the ending of three fetters a mendicant becomes a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening. This is the first fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant---with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---becomes a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. This
is the second fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, with the ending of the five lower fetters, a mendicant is
reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world. This is the third fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the fourth
fruit and benefit.

These four benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four ways.'[^212]

### 11. Things Impossible for the Perfected  {#things-impossible-for-the-perfected .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan are fickle.'[^213] You should say to them,
'Reverends, these things have been taught and pointed out for his
disciples by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha, not to be transgressed so long as life lasts.
Suppose there was a boundary pillar or an iron pillar with deep
foundations, firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. In the same
way, these things have been taught and pointed out for his disciples by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, not to be transgressed so long as life lasts.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress
in nine respects.[^214] A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay person. And they
can't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or
cowardice. A mendicant who is perfected can't transgress in these nine
respects.'

### 12. Questions and Answers  {#questions-and-answers .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetic
Gotama demonstrates boundless knowledge and vision of the past, but not
of the future. What's up with that?' Those wanderers, like incompetent
fools, seem to imagine that one kind of knowledge and vision can be
demonstrated by means of another kind of knowledge and vision.[^215]

Regarding the past, the Realized One has knowledge stemming from memory.
He recollects as far as he wants.

Regarding the future, the Realized One has the knowledge born of
awakening:[^216] 'This is my last rebirth; now there'll be no more
future lives.'

If a question about the past is untrue, false, and pointless, the
Realized One does not reply. If a question about the past is true and
correct, but pointless, he does not reply. If a question about the past
is true, correct, and beneficial, he knows the right time to reply. And
the Realized One replies to questions about the future or the present in
the same way.

And so the Realized One has speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful,
in line with the teaching and training. That's why he's called the
'Realized One'.[^217]

In this world---with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind, all that has been understood by the Realized One.
That's why he's called the 'Realized One'.

From the night when the Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished---in the element
of extinguishment with no residue---everything he speaks, says, and
expresses is real, not otherwise. That's why he's called the 'Realized
One'.

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. Since this is so,
that's why he's called the 'Realized One'. In this world---with its
gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---the Realized One is the
vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power.

### 13. The Undeclared Points  {#the-undeclared-points .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'Is this your
view: "A Realized One exists after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile"?'[^218] You should say to them, 'Reverend, this
has not been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been declared by the
Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One both
exists and doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything
else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been
declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not
been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this not been declared by the
ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's not beneficial or
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. That's why it hasn't been declared by the Buddha.'

### 14. The Declared Points  {#the-declared-points .unnumbered}

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'But what has
been declared by the ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'What has
been declared by the Buddha is this: "This is suffering"---"This is the
origin of suffering"---"This is the cessation of suffering"---"This is
the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering."'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this been declared by the ascetic
Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's beneficial and relevant
to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
That's why it has been declared by the Buddha.'

### 15. Views of the Past  {#views-of-the-past .unnumbered}

Cunda, I have explained to you as they should be explained the views
that some rely on regarding the past.[^219] Shall I explain them to you
in the wrong way? I have explained to you as they should be explained
the views that some rely on regarding the future. Shall I explain them
to you in the wrong way?

What are the views that some rely on regarding the past? There are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self and the
cosmos are eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'The self and the cosmos are not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. The self and the cosmos are
made by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and
another, or they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another.
Pleasure and pain are eternal, or not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. Pleasure and pain are made
by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and another, or
they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that
the self and the cosmos are eternal, and say, 'Reverends, is this what
you say, "The self and the cosmos are eternal"?' But when they say,
'Yes! This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I don't
acknowledge that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have
different opinions on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that
are equal to my own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is
superior when it comes to the higher exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the past.

### 16. Views of the Future  {#views-of-the-future .unnumbered}

What are the views that some rely on regarding the future? There are
some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self is
healthy after death, and formed ... or formless ... or both formed and
formless ... or neither formed nor formless ... or percipient ... or
non-percipient ... or neither percipient nor non-percipient ... or the
self is annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't
exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that,
'The self is formed and healthy after death,' and say, 'Reverends, is
this what you say, "The self is formed and healthy after death"?' But
when they say, 'Yes! This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I
don't acknowledge that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have
different opinions on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that
are equal to my own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is
superior when it comes to the higher exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the future, which I have
explained to you as they should be explained. Shall I explain them to
you in the wrong way?

I have taught and pointed out the four kinds of mindfulness meditation
for giving up and going beyond all these views of the past and the
future.[^220] What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. These are the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation that I have taught for giving up and going beyond all these
views of the past and the future."

Now at that time Venerable [Upavāna]{lang="sa"} was standing behind the
Buddha fanning him. He said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! This exposition of the teaching is impressive, sir, it is very
impressive. Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"Well then, [Upavāna]{lang="sa"}, you may remember this exposition of
the teaching as 'The Impressive Discourse'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable [Upavāna]{lang="sa"}
approved what the Buddha said.

## N 30 The Marks of a Great Man  *Lakkhaṇasutta* {#n-30-the-marks-of-a-great-man-lakkhaṇasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"There are thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses
these has only two possible destinies, no other.[^221] If he stays at
home he becomes a king, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled
king. His dominion extends to all four sides, he achieves stability in
the country, and he possesses the seven treasures. He has the following
seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the
woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh treasure. He
has over a thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies
of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by sea, he reigns by
principle, without rod or sword. But if he goes forth from the lay life
to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha,
who draws back the veil from the world.

And what are the thirty-two marks?[^222]

He has well-planted feet.

On the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels, with rims and
hubs, complete in every detail.

He has stretched heels.

He has long fingers.

His hands and feet are tender.

He has serried hands and feet.

The tops of his feet are arched.

His calves are like those of an antelope.

When standing upright and not bending over, the palms of both hands
touch the knees.

His private parts are covered in a foreskin.

He is golden colored; his skin shines like lustrous gold.

He has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.

His hairs grow one per pore.

His hairs stand up; they're blue-black and curl clockwise.

His body is tall and straight-limbed.

He has bulging muscles in seven places.

His chest is like that of a lion.

He is filled out between the shoulders.

He has the proportional circumference of a banyan tree: the span of his
arms equals the height of his body.

His torso is cylindrical.

He has ridged taste buds.

His jaw is like that of a lion.

He has forty teeth.

His teeth are even.

His teeth have no gaps.

His teeth are perfectly white.

He has a large tongue.

He has the voice of the Divinity,\
\>like a cuckoo's call.

His eyes are indigo.

He has eyelashes like a cow's.

Between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and white like
cotton-wool.

The crown of his head is like a turban.

These are the thirty-two marks of a great man. A great man who possesses
these has only two possible destinies, no other.

Seers who are outsiders remember these marks, but they do not know the
specific deeds performed in the past to obtain each mark.[^223]

### 1. Well-Planted Feet  {#well-planted-feet .unnumbered}

In some past lives, past existences, past abodes the Realized One was
reborn as a human being. He firmly and persistently undertook skillful
behaviors such as good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, giving
and sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect
to mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the
family, and various other things pertaining to skillful behaviors.[^224]
Due to performing, accumulating, heaping up, and amassing those deeds,
when his body broke up, after death, he was reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. There he surpassed the other gods in ten respects:
heavenly lifespan, beauty, happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. When he passed away from there and
came back to this place he obtained this mark of a great man: he has
well-planted feet. He places his foot on the ground evenly, raises it
evenly, and touches the ground evenly with the whole sole of his foot.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. He has the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant,
the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as
the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land
girt by sea---free of harassment by bandits, successful and prosperous,
safe, blessed, and untroubled---he reigns by principle, without rod or
sword. And what does he obtain as king? He can't be stopped by any human
foe or enemy. That's what he obtains as king. But if he goes forth from
the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the world. And what does
he obtain as Buddha? He can't be stopped by any foe or enemy whether
internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or [Māra]{lang="sa"} or divinity or by anyone
in the world. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "Truth, principle, self-control, and restraint;[^225]\
> purity, precepts, and observing the sabbath;\
> giving, harmlessness, delighting in non-violence---\
> firmly undertaking these things, he lived accordingly.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> he steps evenly on this rich earth.
>
> The gathered soothsayers predicted\
> that there is no stopping one of such even tread,\
> as householder or renunciate.\
> That's the meaning shown by this mark.
>
> While living at home he cannot be stopped,\
> he defeats his foes, and cannot be beaten.\
> Due to the fruit of that deed,\
> he cannot be stopped by any human.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> not even the best can ever stop him;[^226]\
> this is the nature of the supreme person."

### 2. Wheels on the Feet  {#wheels-on-the-feet .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He conveyed happiness to many people, eliminating threats,
terror, and danger, providing just protection and security, and giving
gifts with all the trimmings.[^227] Due to performing those deeds he was
reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained
this mark: on the soles of his feet there are thousand-spoked wheels,
with rims and hubs, complete in every detail and well divided inside.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a large following of
brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. But if
he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a fully
awakened Buddha. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He has a large
following of monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans,
dragons, and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha
spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> he brought happiness to many people,\
> ridding them of fear, terror, and danger,\
> eagerly guarding and protecting them.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> wheels on his two feet are found,
>
> all rimmed around and thousand-spoked.\
> The gathered soothsayers predicted,\
> seeing the prince\
> \>with the hundred-fold mark of merits,[^228]\
> that he'd have a following, subduing foes,
>
> which is why he has wheels all rimmed around.\
> If he doesn't choose the life gone forth,\
> he'll roll the wheel and rule the land.\
> The aristocrats will be his vassals,
>
> flocking to his glory.\
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> the gods, humans, titans, Sakka, and monsters;
>
> centaurs and dragons, birds and beasts,\
> will flock to his glory,\
> the supreme, honored by gods and humans."

### 3--5. Stretched Heels, Etc.  {#stretched-heels-etc. .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He gave up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the
sword. He was scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all
living beings. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these three marks: he
has stretched heels, long fingers, and his body is tall and
straight-limbed.[^229]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He's long-lived, preserving
his life for a long time. No human foe or enemy is able to take his life
before his time. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain
as Buddha? He's long-lived, preserving his life for a long time. No foes
or enemies---nor any ascetic or brahmin or god or [Māra]{lang="sa"} or
divinity or anyone in the world---is able to take his life before his
time. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Realizing for himself the horrors of death,\
> he refrained from killing other creatures.\
> By that good conduct he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done.
>
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> he obtained these three marks:\
> his stretched heels are abundant and long,\
> and like the Divinity, he's straight and beautiful,\
> \>with well-formed limbs.[^230]
>
> Fair of arm, youthful, of good posture and breeding,\
> his fingers are soft and tender and long.\
> By these three marks of an excellent man,\
> they indicated that the prince's life would be long:
>
> 'As a householder he will live long;[^231]\
> longer still if he goes forth, due to\
> mastery in the development of psychic power.\
> Thus this is the sign of long life.'"

### 6. Seven Bulging Places  {#seven-bulging-places .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was a donor of delicious and tasty cooked and fresh foods, and
drinks that were sweet and succulent.[^232] Due to performing those
deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place
he obtained this mark: he has bulging muscles in seven places. Both
hands, both feet, both shoulders, and his chest are all bulging.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He gets delicious and tasty
cooked and fresh foods, and drinks that are sweet and succulent. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He gets
delicious and tasty cooked and fresh foods, and drinks that are sweet
and succulent. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He used to give the very best of flavors---\
> scrumptious foods of every kind.\
> Because of that good deed,\
> he rejoiced long in Nandana heaven.
>
> On returning to here, he is rounded in seven places,\
> and tender hands and feet are found.\
> The soothsayers expert in signs declared:\
> 'He'll get tasty foods of all sorts
>
> as a householder, that's what that means.\
> But even if he goes forth he'll get the same,\
> supreme in gaining tasty foods of all sorts,\
> cutting all bonds of the lay life.'"

### 7--8. Tender and Serried Hands  {#tender-and-serried-hands .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He brought people together using the four ways of being
inclusive: giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: his hands and feet are
tender, and they are serried.[^233]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? His retinue is inclusive,
cohesive, and well-managed. This includes brahmins and householders,
people of town and country, finance ministers, military officers,
guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and
princes.[^234] That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain
as Buddha? His retinue is inclusive and well-managed. This includes
monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "By giving and helping others,\
> kindly speech, and equal treatment,\
> such action and conduct as brought people together,\
> he went to heaven due to his esteemed virtue.
>
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> the young baby prince obtained\
> hands and feet so tender and serried,\
> lovely, graceful, and good-looking.
>
> His retinue is loyal and manageable,\
> staying agreeably all over this broad land.[^235]\
> Speaking kindly, seeking happiness,\
> he implements agreeable qualities.
>
> But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments,\
> as victor he speaks Dhamma to the people.\
> Devoted, they respond to his words;\
> after listening, they practice in line with the teaching."

### 9--10. Arched Feet and Upright Hair  {#arched-feet-and-upright-hair .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. His speech was meaningful and principled. He educated many
people, bringing welfare and happiness, offering the teaching. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: the tops of his feet are
arched and his hairs stand up.[^236]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of those who enjoy sensual pleasures. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of all sentient beings.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "His word was meaningful and principled,\
> moving the people with his explanations.\
> He brought welfare and happiness to creatures,\
> unstintingly offering up teaching.
>
> Because of that good deed,\
> he advanced to heaven and there rejoiced.\
> On return to here two marks are found,\
> of excellence and supremacy.
>
> His hairs stand upright,\
> and his ankles stand out well.\
> Swollen with flesh and blood, encased in skin,\
> beautified above the feet.
>
> If such a one lives in the home, he becomes\
> the best of those who enjoy sensual pleasures.\
> There'll be none better than him;\
> he'll proceed\
> \>having mastered all the Black Plum Tree Land.
>
> But going forth the peerless renunciate\
> turns into the best of all creatures.\
> There'll be none better than him,\
> he'll live having mastered the whole world."

### 11. Antelope Calves  {#antelope-calves .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was a thorough teacher of a profession, a branch of knowledge,
conduct, or action, thinking: 'How might they quickly learn and
practice, without getting exhausted?' Due to performing those deeds he
was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he
obtained this mark: his calves are like those of an antelope.[^237]

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He quickly obtains the things
worthy of a king, the factors, supports, and things befitting a king.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He
quickly obtains the things worthy of an ascetic, the factors, supports,
and things befitting an ascetic. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The
Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In professions, knowledge, conduct, and deeds,\
> he thought of how they might easily learn.\
> Quickly, without tiresome delays,\
> he taught them things that harm no-one at all.
>
> Having done that skillful deed\
> \>whose outcome is happiness,\
> he gains prominent and elegant calves.\
> Well-formed in graceful spirals,\
> he's covered in fine rising hairs.
>
> They say that person has antelope calves,\
> and that this is the mark of swift success.\
> If he desires the things fitting the household life,\
> not going forth, they'll quickly be his.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> the peerless renunciate will quickly find\
> what is fitting and suitable."[^238]

### 12. Delicate Skin  {#delicate-skin .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He approached an ascetic or brahmin and asked: 'Sirs, what is
skillful? What is unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless?
What should be cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what
leads to my lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting
welfare and happiness?' Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a
heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark:
he has delicate skin, so delicate that dust and dirt don't stick to his
body.[^239]

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has great wisdom. Of those
who enjoy sensual pleasures, none is his equal or better in wisdom.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He
has great wisdom, widespread wisdom, laughing wisdom, swift wisdom,
sharp wisdom, and penetrating wisdom. No sentient being is his equal or
better in wisdom. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke
this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> eager to understand, he asked questions.\
> Keen to learn, he waited on renunciates,\
> heeding their explanation with pure intent.
>
> Due to that deed of acquiring wisdom,\
> as a human being his skin is delicate.\
> At his birth\
> \>the soothsayers expert in signs prophesied:\
> 'He'll discern delicate matters.'
>
> If he doesn't choose the life gone forth,\
> he'll roll the wheel and rule the land.\
> Among those with material things\
> \>who have been educated,\
> none equal or better than him is found.
>
> But if he chooses the life gone forth,\
> seeing clearly, loving renunciation,\
> gaining wisdom that's supreme and eminent,\
> the one of superb, vast intelligence\
> \>attains awakening."

### 13. Golden Skin  {#golden-skin .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He wasn't irritable or bad-tempered. Even when heavily criticized
he didn't lose his temper, become annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or
display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. He donated soft and fine mats
and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained this mark: he is golden colored; his skin
shines like lustrous gold.[^240]

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He obtains soft and fine mats
and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. That's
what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He obtains
soft and fine mats and blankets, and fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk,
and wool. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "Fixated on good will, he gave gifts.[^241]\
> In an earlier life he poured forth cloth\
> fine and soft to touch,\
> like a god pouring rain on this broad earth.[^242]
>
> So doing he passed from here to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruits of deeds well done.\
> Here he wins a figure shining like honey-yellow gold,[^243]\
> like Indra, the finest of gods.
>
> If that man stays in the house, not wishing to go forth,\
> he conquers and rules this vast, broad earth.\
> He obtains abundant excellent cloth,\
> so fine and soft to touch.
>
> He receives robes, cloth, and the finest garments[^244]\
> if he chooses the life gone forth.\
> For he still partakes of past deed's fruit;\
> what's been done is never lost."

### 14. Privates in Foreskin  {#privates-in-foreskin .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He reunited long-lost and long-separated relatives, friends,
loved ones, and companions. He reunited mother with child and child with
mother; father with child and child with father; brother with brother,
brother with sister, sister with brother, and sister with sister,
bringing them together with rejoicing. Due to performing those deeds he
was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he
obtained this mark: his private parts are covered in a foreskin.[^245]

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has many sons, over a
thousand sons who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his
enemies. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as
Buddha? He has many sons, many thousands of sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. That's what he obtains as
Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In olden days, in past lives,\
> he reunited long-lost\
> and long-separated friends and family,\
> bringing them together with joy.
>
> By means of these deeds he went to heaven,\
> where he enjoyed happiness and merriment.\
> After passing away from there to here,\
> his private parts are covered in a foreskin.
>
> Such a one has many sons,\
> over a thousand descendants,\
> valiant and heroic, devastating foes,\
> a layman's joy, speaking kindly.
>
> But if he lives the renunciate life\
> he has even more sons following his word.\
> As householder or renunciate,\
> that's the meaning shown by this mark."

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

### 15--16. Equal Proportions and Touching the Knees  {#equal-proportions-and-touching-the-knees .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. Examining the gathered population, he knew what they had in
common and what was their own; he knew each person, and he knew the
distinctions between people. In each case, he made appropriate
distinctions between people: 'This one deserves that; that one deserves
this.' Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm.
When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: he has the
proportional circumference of a banyan tree; and when standing upright
and not bending over, the palms of both hands touch the knees.[^246]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is rich, affluent, and
wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property and assets, lots
of money and grain, and a full treasury and storehouses. That's what he
obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He is rich,
affluent, and wealthy. He has these kinds of wealth: the wealth of
faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Examining the many people in a community,\
> he weighed, evaluated, and judged each case:\
> 'This one deserves that.'\
> That's how he used to draw\
> \>distinctions between people.
>
> Now standing without bending\
> he can touch his knees with both hands.\
> With the remaining ripening\
> \>of the fruit of good deeds,\
> his circumference was that of a great tree.
>
> Learned experts in the many different\
> signs and marks prophesied:\
> 'The young prince will obtain\
> many different things that householders deserve.
>
> Here there are many suitable pleasures\
> for the ruler of the land to enjoy as householder.\
> But if he gives up all sensual enjoyments,\
> he will gain the supreme, highest peak of wealth.'"

### 17--19. A Lion's Chest, Etc.  {#a-lions-chest-etc. .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He desired the good, the welfare, the comfort, and sanctuary of
the people, thinking: 'How might they flourish in faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, teachings, and wisdom; in wealth and grain, fields
and land, birds and beasts, children and partners; in bondservants,
workers, and staff; in family, friends, and kin?' Due to performing
those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came back to this
place he obtained these three marks: his chest is like that of a lion;
he is filled out between the shoulders.; and his torso is
cylindrical.[^247]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He's not liable to decline. He
doesn't decline in wealth and grain, fields and land, birds and beasts,
children and partners; in bondservants, workers, and staff; in family,
friends, and kin. He doesn't decline in any of his accomplishments.
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He's
not liable to decline. He doesn't decline in faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. He doesn't decline in any of his
accomplishments.[^248] That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha
spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "His wish was this: 'How may others not decline\
> in faith, ethics, learning, and intelligence,\
> in generosity, teachings, and much good else,\
> in coin and grain, fields and lands,
>
> in children, partners, and livestock,\
> in family, friends, and kin,\
> in strength, and both beauty and happiness?'\
> And so he ever desired their success.
>
> His chest was prominent like that of a lion,\
> filled out between the shoulders,\
> \>and torso cylindrical.\
> Due to the well-done deeds of the past,\
> he had that portent of non-decline.
>
> Even as layman he grows in coin and grain,\
> in wives, children, and livestock.\
> But once gone forth, owning nothing, he attains\
> the supreme awakening which may never decline."

### 20. Ridged Taste Buds  {#ridged-taste-buds .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He would never hurt any sentient being with fists, stones, rods,
or swords. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark: he has
ridged taste buds. His raised taste receptors, originating in the
throat, disperse evenly.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He is rarely ill or unwell.
His stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold.[^249]
That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He is
rarely ill or unwell. His stomach digests well, being neither too hot
nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. That's what he
obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Not with fist or rod or stone,\
> or sword or beating to death,\
> or by bondage or threats\
> did he ever harm anyone.
>
> For that very reason he rejoiced in heaven\
> \>after passing away,\
> finding happiness as a fruit of happy deeds.\
> With taste receptors prominent\
> \>and evenly spreading nutrition,\
> on his return here he has ridged taste buds.
>
> That's why the clever prophets said:\
> 'This man will have much happiness\
> as householder or renunciate.\
> That's the meaning shown by this mark.'"

### 21--22. Indigo Eyes  {#indigo-eyes .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. When looking at others he didn't glare, look askance, or avert
his eyes. Being straightforward, he reached out to others with
straightforward intentions, looking at people with kindly eyes. Due to
performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he came
back to this place he obtained these two marks: his eyes are indigo, and
he has eyelashes like a cow's.[^250]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? The people look on him with
kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved to the brahmins and householders,
people of town and country, finance ministers, military officers,
guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and
princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he obtain as
Buddha? The people look on him with kindly eyes. He is dear and beloved
to the monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and
centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "With not a glare or glance askance,\
> nor averting of the eyes;\
> straightforward, he reached out straightforwardly,\
> looking at people with kindly eyes.
>
> In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit\
> and result, rejoicing there.\
> But here he has a cow's eyelashes,\
> and indigo eyes so fair to see.
>
> Many soothsayers, men clever[^251]\
> and learned in prognostic texts,\
> expert in cow-like lashes, indicated he'd\
> be looked upon with kindly eyes.
>
> Even as a householder he'd be regarded kindly,\
> beloved of the people.\
> But if he becomes an ascetic, not lay,\
> as destroyer of sorrow he'll be loved by many."

### 23. Crown Like a Turban  {#crown-like-a-turban .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He was the leader and forerunner of people in skillful behaviors
such as good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, giving and
sharing, taking precepts, observing the sabbath, paying due respect to
mother and father, ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in the
family, and various other things pertaining to skillful behaviors.[^252]
Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm. When he
came back to this place he obtained this mark: the crown of his head is
like a turban.

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a large following of
brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? He has a large following of monks, nuns,
laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs. That's
what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "Among people of good conduct, he was the leader,\
> devoted to a life of principle among the principled.\
> The people followed him,\
> and he experienced the fruit of good deeds in heaven.
>
> Having experienced that fruit,\
> he gains a head crowned like a turban.\
> The experts in omens and signs prophesied:\
> 'He will be leader of the people.
>
> Among people then, as before,\
> they will bring presents for him.\
> If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land,\
> he'll gain the service of the people.
>
> But if that man goes forth,\
> he'll be sophisticated, proficient in the teachings.\
> Devoted to the virtues of his instruction,\
> the people will become his followers.'"

### 24--25. One Hair Per Pore, and a Tuft  {#one-hair-per-pore-and-a-tuft .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from lying. He spoke the truth and stuck to the
truth. He was honest and dependable, and didn't trick the world with his
words. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly realm.
When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: his hairs
grow one per pore, and between his eyebrows there grows a tuft, soft and
white like cotton-wool.[^253]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has many close adherents
among the brahmins and householders, people of town and country, finance
ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors, rulers,
tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king. And what
does he obtain as Buddha? He has many close adherents among the monks,
nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs.
That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "In past lives he was true to his promise,\
> with no forked tongue, he shunned lies.\
> He never broke his word to anyone,\
> but spoke what was true, real, and factual.
>
> A tuft so very white like cotton-wool\
> grew prettily between his eyebrows.\
> And never two, but only one,\
> hair grew in each of his pores.
>
> Many soothsayers learned in marks\
> and expert in signs gathered and prophesied:\
> 'One like this, with tuft and hair so prominent,\
> will have many as his close adherents.
>
> Even as householder many people will follow him,\
> due to the power of deeds in the past.\
> But once gone forth, owning nothing,\
> as Buddha the people will follow him.'"

### 26--27. Forty Gapless Teeth  {#forty-gapless-teeth .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from divisive speech. He didn't repeat in one place
what he heard in another so as to divide people against each other.
Instead, he reconciled those who were divided, supporting unity,
delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks: he
has forty teeth, and his teeth have no gaps.[^254]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? His retinue cannot be divided.
This includes brahmins and householders, people of town and country,
finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers, councillors,
rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he obtains as king.
And what does he obtain as Buddha? His retinue cannot be divided. This
includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons,
and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He spoke no words divisive causing friends to split,\
> creating disputes that foster division,\
> acting improperly by fostering quarrels,\
> creating division among friends.
>
> He spoke kind words to foster harmony,\
> uniting those who are divided.\
> He eliminated quarrels among the people,\
> rejoicing together with the united.
>
> In good rebirths he enjoyed the fruit\
> and result, rejoicing there.\
> Here his teeth are gapless, close together,\
> forty standing prominent in his mouth.
>
> If he becomes an aristocrat, ruler of the land,\
> his assembly will be indivisible.\
> And as an ascetic, stainless, immaculate,\
> his assembly will follow him, unshakable."

### 28--29. A Large Tongue and the Voice of the Divinity  {#a-large-tongue-and-the-voice-of-the-divinity .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from harsh speech. He spoke in a way that's mellow,
pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and
agreeable to the people. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in
a heavenly realm. When he came back to this place he obtained these two
marks: he has a large tongue, and the voice of the Divinity, like a
cuckoo's call.

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He has a persuasive voice. His
words are persuasive to brahmins and householders, people of town and
country, finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, ministers,
councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's what he
obtains as king. And what does he obtain as Buddha? He has a persuasive
voice. His words are persuasive to monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods,
humans, titans, dragons, and centaurs. That's what he obtains as
Buddha." The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

> "He never spoke a loud harsh word,\
> insulting, quarrelsome,\
> causing harm, rude, crushing the people.\
> His speech was sweet, helpful, and courteous.
>
> He uttered words dear to the mind,\
> going to the heart, pleasing to the ear.\
> He enjoyed the fruit of his good verbal conduct,\
> experiencing the fruit of good deeds in heaven.
>
> Having experienced that fruit,\
> on his return to here\
> \>he acquired the voice of the Divinity.\
> His tongue was long and wide,\
> and his speech was persuasive.
>
> Even as householder his speech brings prosperity.\
> But if that man goes forth,\
> speaking often to the people,\
> they'll be persuaded by his fair words."

### 30. A Lion-Like Jaw  {#a-lion-like-jaw .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He refrained from talking nonsense. His words were timely, true,
and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He said things
at the right time which were valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial. Due to performing those deeds he was reborn in a heavenly
realm. When he came back to this place he obtained this mark: his jaw is
like that of a lion.[^255]

Possessing this mark, if he stays at home he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. And what does he obtain as king? He can't be destroyed by any
human foe or enemy. That's what he obtains as king. And what does he
obtain as Buddha? He can't be destroyed by any foe or enemy whether
internal or external; nor by greed, hate, or delusion; nor by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or [Māra]{lang="sa"} or divinity or by anyone
in the world. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "Neither nonsensical nor silly,\
> his way of speaking was never loose.\
> He eliminated what was unbeneficial,\
> and spoke for the welfare\
> \>and happiness of the people.
>
> So doing he passed from here to be reborn in heaven,\
> where he enjoyed the fruit of deeds well done.\
> Passing away, on his return to here,\
> he gained a jaw like the finest of beasts.
>
> He became a king so very hard to defeat,\
> a mighty lord and ruler of men.\
> He was equal to the best\
> \>in the city of the Three and Thirty,\
> like Indra, the finest of gods.
>
> One such as that is not easily beaten by centaurs,\
> titans, spirits, monsters, or gods.\
> If he becomes of such a kind,\
> he illuminates the quarters and in-between."

### 31--32. Even and White Teeth  {#even-and-white-teeth .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in some past lives the Realized One was reborn as a human
being. He gave up wrong livelihood and earned a living by right
livelihood. He refrained from falsifying weights, metals, or measures;
bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction,
banditry, plunder, and violence. Due to performing, accumulating,
heaping up, and amassing those deeds, when his body broke up, after
death, he was reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. There he
surpassed the other gods in ten respects: heavenly lifespan, beauty,
happiness, glory, sovereignty, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches. When he came back to this place he obtained these two marks:
his teeth are even and perfectly white.[^256]

Possessing these marks, if he stays at home he becomes a king, a
wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extends
to all four sides, he achieves stability in the country, and he
possesses the seven treasures. He has the following seven treasures: the
wheel, the elephant, the horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder,
and the commander as the seventh treasure. He has over a thousand sons
who are valiant and heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After
conquering this land girt by sea---free of harassment by bandits,
successful and prosperous, safe, blessed, and untroubled---he reigns by
principle, without rod or sword.[^257] And what does he obtain as king?
His retinue is pure. This includes brahmins and householders, people of
town and country, finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen,
ministers, councillors, rulers, tax beneficiaries, and princes. That's
what he obtains as king.

But if he goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, he becomes a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, who draws back the veil from the
world. And what does he obtain as Buddha? His retinue is pure. This
includes monks, nuns, laymen, laywomen, gods, humans, titans, dragons,
and centaurs. That's what he obtains as Buddha." The Buddha spoke this
matter.

On this it is said:

> "He abandoned wrong livelihood, and created\
> a way of life that's fair, pure, and just.\
> He eliminated what was unbeneficial,\
> and lived for the welfare and happiness of the people.
>
> Having done what's praised\
> \>by the clever, the wise, and the good,\
> that man experienced the fruit in heaven.\
> Equal to the best in the heaven of Three and Thirty,\
> he enjoyed himself with pleasure and play.
>
> From there he passed back to a human life.\
> With the remaining ripening\
> \>of the fruit of good deeds,\
> he obtained teeth that are even,\
> gleaming, bright, and white.
>
> Many soothsayers regarded as wise men\
> gathered and predicted of him:\
> 'With twice-born teeth\
> \>so even, so white, so clean and bright\
> his retinue will be so pure.
>
> As king, his people will also be pure,\
> when he rules having conquered this earth so broad.\
> They won't harm the country,\
> but will live for the welfare\
> \>and happiness of the people.
>
> But if he goes forth he'll be an ascetic free of ill,\
> his passions quelled, the veil drawn back.\
> Rid of stress and weariness,\
> he sees this world and the next.
>
> Those who do his bidding, both lay and renunciate,\
> shake off wickedness, impure and blameworthy.\
> He's surrounded by pure people, who dispel\
> stains, callousness, sin, and corruptions.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 31 Advice to Sigālaka  *Siṅgālasutta* {#n-31-advice-to-sigālaka-siṅgālasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground. Now at that time the householder's son [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"}
rose early and left [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}. With his clothes and hair all
wet, he raised his joined palms to revere the various quarters---[^258]
east, south, west, north, below, and above.[^259]

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} for alms. He saw [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"}
revering the quarters and said to him, "Householder's son, why are you
revering the quarters in this way?"

"Sir, on his deathbed my father said to me: 'My dear, please revere the
quarters.'[^260] Honoring, respecting, and venerating my father's words,
I rose early and left [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} and, with my clothes and
hair all wet, raised my joined palms to revere the various
quarters---east, south, west, north, below, and above."

### 1. The Six Directions  {#the-six-directions .unnumbered}

"Householder's son, that's not how the six directions should be revered
in the training of the Noble One."[^261]

"But sir, how should the six directions be revered in the training of
the Noble One? Sir, please teach me this."

"Well then, householder's son, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," replied [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"}. The Buddha said this:

"Householder's son, a noble disciple gives up four corrupt deeds,
doesn't do bad deeds on four grounds, and avoids six drains on wealth.
When they've left these fourteen bad things behind they have the six
directions covered.[^262] They're practicing to win in both worlds, and
they succeed in this world and the next. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

### 2. Four Corrupt Deeds  {#four-corrupt-deeds .unnumbered}

What four corrupt deeds have they given up?[^263] Killing living
creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, and lying: these are corrupt
deeds. These are the four corrupt deeds they've given up."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Killing, stealing,\
> telling lies,\
> and committing adultery:\
> astute people don't praise these things."

### 3. Four Grounds  {#four-grounds .unnumbered}

"On what four grounds do they not do bad deeds?[^264] One does bad deeds
prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. When a
noble disciple is not prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity,
and cowardice, they don't do bad deeds on these four grounds."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "If you act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, or stupidity,\
> your fame shrinks,\
> like the moon in the waning fortnight.
>
> If you don't act against the teaching\
> out of favoritism, hostility, cowardice, and stupidity,\
> your fame swells,\
> like the moon in the waxing fortnight."

### 4. Six Drains on Wealth  {#six-drains-on-wealth .unnumbered}

"What six drains on wealth do they avoid?[^265] Habitually engaging in
the following things is a drain on wealth: consuming beer, wine, and
liquor intoxicants; roaming the streets at night; frequenting festivals;
gambling; bad friends; laziness.[^266]

### 5. Six Drawbacks of Drinking  {#six-drawbacks-of-drinking .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of habitually consuming beer, wine, and
liquor that cause intoxication.[^267] Immediate loss of wealth,
promotion of quarrels, susceptibility to illness, disrepute, indecent
exposure; and weakened wisdom is the sixth thing. These are the six
drawbacks of habitually consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.

### 6. Six Drawbacks of Roaming the Streets at Night  {#six-drawbacks-of-roaming-the-streets-at-night .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of roaming the streets at night. Yourself,
your partners and children, and your property are all left unguarded.
You're suspected of bad deeds. Untrue rumors spread about you. You're at
the forefront of many things that entail suffering. These are the six
drawbacks of roaming the streets at night.

### 7. Six Drawbacks of Festivals  {#six-drawbacks-of-festivals .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of frequenting festivals. You're always
thinking: 'Where's the dancing? Where's the singing? Where's the music?
Where are the stories? Where's the applause? Where are the kettledrums?'
These are the six drawbacks of frequenting festivals.

### 8. Six Drawbacks of Gambling  {#six-drawbacks-of-gambling .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of habitually gambling. Victory breeds
enmity. The loser mourns their money. There is immediate loss of wealth.
A gambler's word carries no weight in public assembly. Friends and
colleagues treat them with contempt. And no-one wants to marry a
gambler, for they think: 'This individual is a gambler---they're not
able to support a partner.' These are the six drawbacks of habitually
gambling.

### 9. Six Drawbacks of Bad Friends  {#six-drawbacks-of-bad-friends .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of bad friends. You become friends and
companions with those who are addicts, carousers, drunkards, frauds,
swindlers, and thugs. These are the six drawbacks of bad friends.

### 10. Six Drawbacks of Laziness  {#six-drawbacks-of-laziness .unnumbered}

There are these six drawbacks of habitual laziness. You don't get your
work done because you think: 'It's too cold! It's too hot. It's too
late! It's too early! I'm too hungry! I'm too full!' By dwelling on so
many excuses for not working, you don't make any more money, and the
money you already have runs out. These are the six drawbacks of habitual
laziness."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Some are just drinking buddies,\
> some call you their dear, dear friend,\
> but a true friend is one\
> who stands by you in need.
>
> Sleeping late, adultery,\
> making enemies, harmfulness,\
> bad friends, and avarice:\
> these six grounds ruin a person.
>
> With bad friends, bad companions,\
> bad behavior and alms-resort,\
> a man falls to ruin\
> in both this world and the next.
>
> Dice, women, toddy, song and dance;[^268]\
> sleeping by day and roaming at night;\
> bad friends, and avarice:\
> these six grounds ruin a person.
>
> They play dice and drink beer,\
> and consort with women loved by others.\
> Associating with the worse, not the better,\
> they diminish like the waning moon.
>
> One who is broke and destitute due to toddy,[^269]\
> thirsty, drinking in the bar,\
> drowning in debt,\
> will quickly lose their way.[^270]
>
> When you're in the habit of sleeping late,\
> seeing night as time to rise,\
> and always getting drunk,\
> you can't keep up the household life.
>
> 'Too cold, too hot,\
> too late,' they say.\
> When the young neglect their work like this,\
> riches pass them by.[^271]
>
> But one who considers heat and cold\
> as no more than blades of grass---\
> he does his duties as a man,\
> and happiness never fails."

### 11. Fake Friends  {#fake-friends .unnumbered}

"Householder's son, you should recognize these four enemies disguised as
friends: the taker, the talker, the flatterer, the spender.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all take on four grounds.

> Your possessions end up theirs.\
> Giving little, they expect a lot.\
> They do their duty out of fear.\
> They associate for their own advantage.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all take on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's all talk on four grounds. They're
hospitable in the past. They're hospitable in the future. They're full
of meaningless pleasantries. When something needs doing in the present
they point to their own misfortune. You can recognize a fake friend
who's all talk on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's a flatterer on four grounds. They
support you equally in doing bad and doing good. They praise you to your
face, and put you down behind your back. You can recognize a fake friend
who's a flatterer on these four grounds.

You can recognize a fake friend who's a spender on four grounds. They
accompany you when drinking, roaming the streets at night, frequenting
festivals, and gambling. You can recognize a fake friend who's a spender
on these four grounds."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "One friend is all take,\
> another all talk;\
> one's just a flatterer,\
> and one's a friend who spends.
>
> An astute person understands\
> these four enemies for what they are\
> and keeps them at a distance,\
> as they'd shun a risky road."

### 12. Good-Hearted Friends  {#good-hearted-friends .unnumbered}

"Householder's son, you should recognize these four good-hearted
friends: the helper, the friend in good times and bad, the counselor,
and the one who's sympathetic.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a helper on four grounds.
They guard you when you're negligent. They guard your property when
you're negligent. They keep you safe in times of danger. When something
needs doing, they provide you with twice the money you need. You can
recognize a good-hearted friend who's a helper on these four grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's the same in good times and
bad on four grounds. They tell you secrets. They keep your secrets. They
don't abandon you in times of trouble. They'd even give their life for
your welfare. You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's the same in
good times and bad on these four grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a counselor on four
grounds. They keep you from doing bad. They support you in doing good.
They teach you what you do not know. They explain the path to heaven.
You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's a counselor on these four
grounds.

You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's sympathetic on four
grounds. They don't delight in your misfortune. They delight in your
good fortune. They keep others from criticizing you. They encourage
praise of you. You can recognize a good-hearted friend who's sympathetic
on these four grounds."

The Buddha spoke this matter. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "A friend who's a helper,\
> one the same in both pleasure and pain,\
> a friend of good counsel,\
> and one of sympathy;
>
> an astute person understands\
> these four friends for what they are\
> and carefully looks after them,\
> like a mother the child at her breast.\
> The astute and virtuous\
> shine like a burning flame.
>
> They pick up riches as bees\
> roaming round pick up pollen.\
> And their riches proceed to grow,\
> like a termite mound piling up.
>
> In gathering wealth like this,\
> a householder does enough for their family.\
> And they'd hold on to friends\
> by dividing their wealth in four.
>
> One portion is to enjoy.\
> Two parts invest in work.\
> And the fourth should be kept\
> for times of trouble."

### 13. Covering the Six Directions  {#covering-the-six-directions .unnumbered}

"And how, householder's son, does a noble disciple cover the six
directions?[^272] These six directions should be recognized: parents as
the east, tutors as the south, partner and children as the west, friends
and colleagues as the north, bondservants and workers as beneath, and
ascetics and brahmins as above.[^273]

A child should serve their parents as the eastern quarter in five ways,
thinking: 'I will support those who supported me. I'll do my duty for
them. I'll maintain the family lineage. I'll take care of the
inheritance. When they have passed away, I'll make an offering on their
behalf.' Parents served by the children in these five ways show sympathy
to them in five ways. They keep them from doing bad. They support them
in doing good. They train them in a profession. They connect them with a
suitable partner. They transfer the inheritance in due time. Parents
served by their children in these five ways show sympathy to them in
these five ways. And that's how the eastern quarter is covered, kept
safe and free of peril.

A pupil should serve their tutor as the southern quarter in five ways:
by rising for them, by serving them, by listening well, by looking after
them, and by carefully learning their profession. Tutors served by their
pupils in these five ways show sympathy to them in five ways. They make
sure they're well educated and well drilled in memorization. They
clearly explain all the knowledge of the profession. They introduce them
to their friends and colleagues. They provide protection in every
region.[^274] Tutors served by their pupils in these five ways show
sympathy to them in these five ways. And that's how the southern quarter
is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

A husband should serve his wife as the western quarter in five ways: by
treating her with honor, by not looking down on her, by not being
unfaithful, by relinquishing authority to her, and by presenting her
with adornments.[^275] A wife served by her husband in these five ways
shows sympathy to him in five ways. She's well-organized in her work.
She manages the domestic help. She's not unfaithful. She preserves his
earnings. She's deft and tireless in all her duties. A wife served by
her husband in these five ways shows sympathy to him in these five ways.
And that's how the western quarter is covered, kept safe and free of
peril.

A gentleman should serve his friends and colleagues as the northern
quarter in five ways: giving, kindly words, taking care, equality, and
not using tricky words. Friends and colleagues served by a gentleman in
these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways. They guard him when
they're negligent. They guard his property when they're negligent. They
keep him safe in times of danger. They don't abandon him in times of
trouble. They honor his descendants. Friends and colleagues served by a
gentleman in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways.
And that's how the northern quarter is covered, kept safe and free of
peril.

A master should serve their bondservants and workers as the lower
quarter in five ways: by organizing work according to ability, by paying
food and wages, by nursing them when sick, by sharing special treats,
and by giving time off work. Bondservants and workers served by a master
in these five ways show sympathy to him in five ways. They get up first,
and go to bed last. They don't steal. They do their work well. And they
promote a good reputation. Bondservants and workers served by a master
in these five ways show sympathy to him in these five ways. And that's
how the lower quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril.

A gentleman should serve ascetics and brahmins as the upper quarter in
five ways: by loving deeds of body, speech, and mind, by not turning
them away at the gate, and by providing them with material needs.
Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman in these five ways show
sympathy to him in six ways. They keep him from doing bad. They support
him in doing good. They think of him with kindly thoughts. They teach
him what he does not know. They clarify what he's already learned. They
explain the path to heaven. Ascetics and brahmins served by a gentleman
in these five ways show sympathy to him in these six ways. And that's
how the upper quarter is covered, kept safe and free of peril."

The Buddha spoke this matter. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Parents are the east,\
> tutors the south,\
> wives and child the west,\
> friends and colleagues the north,
>
> servants and workers below,\
> and ascetics and brahmins above.\
> By honoring these quarters\
> a householder does enough for their family.
>
> The astute and the virtuous,\
> the gentle and the articulate,\
> the humble and the kind:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> The diligent, not lazy,\
> those not disturbed by troubles,\
> those consistent in conduct, the intelligent:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> The inclusive, the makers of friends,\
> the bountiful, those rid of stinginess,\
> those who lead, train, and persuade:\
> they're the kind who win glory.
>
> Giving and kindly words,\
> taking care here,\
> and treating equally in worldly conditions,\
> as befits them in each case;\
> these ways of being inclusive in the world\
> are like a moving chariot's linchpin.
>
> If there were no such ways of being inclusive,\
> neither mother nor father\
> would be respected and honored\
> for what they've done for their children.
>
> But since these ways of being inclusive do exist,\
> the astute do regard them well,\
> so they achieve greatness\
> and are praised."

When this was said, [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"} the householder's son said to
the Buddha, "Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go
for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as
a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

## N 32 The Āṭānāṭiya Protection  *Āṭānāṭiyasutta* {#n-32-the-āṭānāṭiya-protection-āṭānāṭiyasutta .unnumbered}

### 1. The First Recitation Section  {#the-first-recitation-section .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.[^276]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying
near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then, late
at night, the four great kings---with large armies of spirits, centaurs,
goblins, and dragons---set guards, troops, and wards at the four
quarters and then, lighting up the entire Vulture's Peak with their
beauty, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Before
sitting down to one side, some spirits bowed, some exchanged greetings
and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the
Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept silent.

Seated to one side, the Great King [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} said to the
Buddha,[^277] "Sir, some high spirits have confidence in the Buddha,
some do not. Some middling spirits have confidence in the Buddha, some
do not. Some low spirits have confidence in the Buddha, some do not. But
mostly the spirits don't have confidence in the Buddha. Why is that?
Because the Buddha teaches them to refrain from killing living
creatures, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, and consuming beer, wine,
and liquor intoxicants. But mostly they don't refrain from such things.
They don't like that or approve of it.

Sir, there are disciples of the Buddha who frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest that are quiet and still, far from the
madding crowd, remote from human settlements, and fit for retreat. There
dwell high spirits who have no confidence in the Buddha's dispensation.
To give them confidence, may the Buddha please learn the
[Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection for the guarding, protection, safety,
and comfort of the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen." The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, on that occasion Great King
[Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"} recited the [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"}
protection.[^278]

> "Hail [Vipassī]{lang="sa"},[^279]\
> the glorious Clear-eyed One!\
> Hail [Sikhī]{lang="sa"},\
> sympathetic for all beings!
>
> Hail [Vessabhū]{lang="sa"},\
> cleansed and austere!\
> Hail Kakusandha,\
> crusher of [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s army!
>
> Hail [Koṇāgamana]{lang="sa"},\
> the brahmin who has lived the life!\
> Hail Kassapa,\
> everywhere free!
>
> Hail [Aṅgīrasa]{lang="sa"},[^280]\
> the glorious Sakyan!\
> He taught this Dhamma\
> that dispels all suffering.
>
> Those in the world who are quenched,\
> truly discerning,\
> not backbiters; such people\
> being great of heart and intrepid,
>
> revere that Gotama;\
> he who is helpful to gods and humans,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct,\
> great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Where rises the sun---[^281]\
> Aditi's child, the great orb,\
> who in his rising\
> dispels the night,\
> and of whom, when sun has risen,\
> it is said to be the day---
>
> there is a deep lake,\
> an ocean of flowing waters.\
> That's how they understand that lake there,[^282]\
> as an ocean of flowing waters.
>
> From here that is the eastern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the centaurs;\
> his name is [Dhataraṭṭha]{lang="sa"}.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the centaurs.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;[^283]\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> It's where the departed go, they say,[^284]\
> who are dividers and backbiters,\
> killers and hunters,\
> bandits and frauds.
>
> From here that is the southern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the goblins;\
> his name is [Virūḷha]{lang="sa"}.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the goblins.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> Where sets the sun---[^285]\
> Aditi's child, the great orb,\
> who in his setting\
> ends the day,\
> and of whom, when sun has set,\
> it is said to be the night---
>
> there is a deep lake in that place,\
> an ocean of flowing waters.\
> That's how they understand that lake there,\
> as an ocean of flowing waters.
>
> From here that is the western quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of the dragons;\
> his name is [Virūpakkha]{lang="sa"}.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the dragons.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'
>
> Where lovely Uttarakuru is,[^286]\
> and the beautiful Mount Meru,[^287]\
> humans born there\
> are unselfish, without possessions.[^288]
>
> They do not sow the seed,\
> nor do they draw the plough.\
> The rice eaten by people[^289]\
> ripens in untilled soil,
>
> free of powder or husk, pure,\
> fragrant, with only the rice-grain.\
> After cooking in a tandoor oven,[^290]\
> they enjoy eating that food.
>
> Having prepared a cow with hooves uncloven,[^291]\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a beast with hooves uncloven,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having prepared a woman-drawn carriage,[^292]\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a man-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having prepared a girl-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.\
> Having prepared a boy-drawn carriage,\
> they're drawn about from place to place.
>
> Having ascended their vehicle,\
> that king's servants\
> tour about in every quarter,
>
> provided with heavenly vehicles\
> of elephant and of horse.\
> And there are mansions and palanquins\
> for that great and glorious king.
>
> And he has cities, too,\
> well-built in the sky:\
> [Āṭānāṭā]{lang="sa"}, [Kusināṭā]{lang="sa"},
> [Parakusināṭā]{lang="sa"},[^293]\
> [Nāṭapuriyā]{lang="sa"}, and [Parakusiṭanāṭā]{lang="sa"}.[^294]
>
> To the north is [Kapīvanta]{lang="sa"},[^295]\
> and Janogha lies beyond.[^296]\
> And there's Navanavutiya, Ambara-ambaravatiya,[^297]\
> and the royal capital named [Āḷakamandā]{lang="sa"}.[^298]
>
> The Great King Kuvera, dear sir,\
> has a capital named [Visāṇā]{lang="sa"},[^299]\
> which is why the great king\
> is called '[Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}'.
>
> These each individually inform the King:\
> [Tatolā]{lang="sa"}, [Tattalā]{lang="sa"},
> [Tatotalā]{lang="sa"},[^300]\
> Ojasi, Tejasi, Tatojasi,[^301]\
> [Sūra]{lang="sa"}, [Rājā]{lang="sa"}, [Ariṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, and
> Nemi.[^302]
>
> There is a lake there too named [Dharaṇī]{lang="sa"},[^303]\
> whence the clouds rain forth,\
> and the rains disperse.\
> There is a hall there too named [Sālavatī]{lang="sa"},[^304]
>
> where the spirits frequent.\
> There the trees are ever in fruit,\
> with many different flocks of birds.\
> Peacocks and herons call out there,\
> and the sweet cuckoos too.
>
> One bird cries out 'Live, live!',\
> another 'Lift up your heart!'\
> There are cocks and kookaburras,[^305]\
> and in the wood the woodpeckers.[^306]
>
> The parrots and mynah cry out there,\
> and the 'little stick-boy' birds.\
> Kuvera's pond of rushes\
> is lovely all the time.
>
> From here that is the northern quarter,\
> so the people say.\
> That quarter is warded\
> by a great king, glorious,
>
> the lord of spirits;\
> his name is Kuvera.\
> He delights in song and dance,\
> honored by the spirits.
>
> And he has many mighty sons\
> all of one name, so I've heard.\
> Eighty, and ten, and one---\
> all of them named Indra.
>
> After seeing the Awakened One,\
> the Buddha, kinsman of the Sun,\
> they revere him from afar,\
> the one great of heart and intrepid.
>
> Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> You examine us skillfully;\
> the non-humans bow to you.\
> We've been asked many a time,\
> 'Do you bow to Gotama the victor?'
>
> And so we ought to declare:\
> 'We bow to Gotama the victor,\
> accomplished in knowledge and conduct!\
> We bow to Gotama the awakened!'

This, dear sir, is the [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection for the
guarding, protection, safety, and comfort of the monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen.

The monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen should learn this
[Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection well and completely memorize it. If
anyone who does so is approached while walking, standing, sitting, or
lying down by any non-human being with malicious intent---including
males, females, boys, girls, chief ministers, councillors, and servants
among the spirits, centaurs, goblins, and dragons---that non-human will
receive no homage or respect in any village or town. And they will
receive no ground or dwelling in my capital of [Ālakamandā]{lang="sa"}.
Nor will they get to go to the conference of the spirits. In addition,
the non-humans would not give or take them in marriage. They'd heap
personal abuse on them, drop an empty bowl on their head, and even split
their head into seven pieces!

For there are, dear sir, non-humans who are fierce, cruel, and violent.
They don't obey the Great Kings or their men or their men's men. They're
said to be rebelling against the Great Kings. They're just like the
bandits in the king of Magadha's realm who don't obey the king, his men,
or his men's men, and are said to be rebelling against the king.

If any non-human being with malicious intent---including males, females,
boys, girls, ministers, councillors, and servants among the spirits,
centaurs, goblins, and dragons---approaches a monk, nun, layman, or
laywoman while walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, one ought to
yell, cry, and scream to the spirits, great spirits, generals, great
generals: 'This spirit's got me! This spirit's entered me! This spirit's
annoying me! This spirit's harassing me! This spirit's hurting me! This
spirit's harming me! This spirit won't let me go!'

To what spirits, great spirits, generals, great generals?

> 'Indra, Soma, and [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"},[^307]\
> [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"}, the Progenitor,[^308]\
> Candana and [Kāmaseṭṭha]{lang="sa"},\
> [Kinnughaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} and [Nighaṇḍu]{lang="sa"},
>
> [Panāda]{lang="sa"} and [Opamañña]{lang="sa"},\
> and [Mātali]{lang="sa"}, the god's charioteer.\
> Cittasena the centaur,\
> and the kings Nala and Janesabha,
>
> [Sātāgira]{lang="sa"}, Hemavata,\
> [Puṇṇaka]{lang="sa"}, Karatiya, and [Guḷa]{lang="sa"};[^309]\
> Sivaka and Mucalinda,[^310]\
> [Vessāmitta]{lang="sa"}, Yugandhara,[^311]
>
> [Gopāla]{lang="sa"}, Suppagedha,[^312]\
> Hiri, Netti, and Mandiya;[^313]\
> [Pañcālacaṇḍa]{lang="sa"}, [Āḷavaka]{lang="sa"},[^314]\
> Pajjunna, Sumana, Sumukha,[^315]\
> Dadhimukha, [Maṇi]{lang="sa"}, [Māṇivara]{lang="sa"},
> [Dīgha]{lang="sa"},[^316]\
> together with [Serīsaka]{lang="sa"}.'[^317]

This, dear sir, is the [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection for the
guarding, protection, safety, and comfort of the monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen. Well, now, dear sir, I must go. I have many duties, and
much to do."

"Please, Great Kings, go at your convenience."

Then the four great kings got up from their seats, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right side, before
vanishing right there. And before the other spirits present vanished,
some bowed and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their
right side, some exchanged greetings and polite conversation, some held
up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some announced their name and
clan, while some kept silent.

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

### 2. The Second Recitation Section  {#the-second-recitation-section .unnumbered}

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, repeating all the verses spoken. Then he added:

"Mendicants, learn the [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection! Memorize the
[Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection! Remember the [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"}
protection! The [Āṭānāṭiya]{lang="sa"} protection is beneficial, and is
for the guarding, protection, safety, and comfort of the monks, nuns,
laymen, and laywomen."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

## N 33 Reciting in Concert  *Saṅgītisutta* {#n-33-reciting-in-concert-saṅgītisutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Mallas together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five
hundred mendicants when he arrived at a Mallian town named
[Pāvā]{lang="sa"}.[^318] There he stayed in Cunda the smith's mango
grove.[^319]

Now at that time a new town hall named [Ubbhaṭaka]{lang="sa"} had
recently been constructed for the Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}. It had
not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any person at
all.[^320] The Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} also heard that the Buddha
had arrived and was staying in Cunda's mango grove. Then they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, a new
town hall named [Ubbhaṭaka]{lang="sa"} has recently been constructed for
the Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}. It has not yet been occupied by an
ascetic or brahmin or any person at all. May the Buddha be the first to
use it, and only then will the Mallas of [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} use it. That
would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Mallas of
[Pāvā]{lang="sa"}." The Buddha consented in silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Mallas got up from
their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on
their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread
carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil
lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
told him of their preparations, saying, "Please, sir, come at your
convenience."

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new
town hall together with the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants. Having
washed his feet he entered the town hall and sat against the central
column facing east. The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants also washed
their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing
east, with the Buddha right in front of them. The Mallas of
[Pāvā]{lang="sa"} also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat
against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of
them.

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the Mallas with a Dhamma talk. Then he dismissed them,
"The night is getting late, [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"}.[^321] Please go at
your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the Mallas. They got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before
leaving.

Soon after they left, the Buddha looked around the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}
of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed Venerable
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, "[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}
of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness. Give them some Dhamma
talk as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll stretch it."[^322]

"Yes, sir," [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} replied.

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} clan had
recently passed away at [Pāvā]{lang="sa"}.[^323] With his passing the
Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling,
and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words: "You
don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching
and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You're
practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You
said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. What you've thought so much about has been
disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're
trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics. And the Jain [Ñātika]{lang="sa"}'s white-clothed lay disciples
were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics.
They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken
monument and without a refuge.

Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} told the mendicants about these things. He
went on to say, "That's what happens, reverends, when a teaching and
training is poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating,
not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened
Buddha. But this teaching is well explained and well propounded to us by
the Blessed One, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone
who is a fully awakened Buddha. You should all recite this in concert,
without disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.

And what is that teaching?

### 1. Ones  {#ones .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha.[^324] You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans. What are the teachings grouped by one?

All sentient beings are sustained by food.[^325]

All sentient beings are sustained by conditions.[^326]

These are the teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained
by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha.[^327] You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans.

### 2. Twos  {#twos .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by two?

Name and form.

Ignorance and craving for continued existence.[^328]

Views favoring continued existence and views favoring ending
existence.[^329]

Lack of conscience and prudence.

Conscience and prudence.

Being hard to admonish and having bad friends.

Being easy to admonish and having good friends.

Skill in offenses and skill in resolving offenses.[^330]

Skill in meditative attainments and skill in emerging from those
attainments.[^331]

Skill in the elements and skill in application of mind.[^332]

Skill in the sense fields and skill in dependent origination.[^333]

Skill in what is possible and skill in what is impossible.[^334]

Integrity and scrupulousness.

Patience and sweetness.

Friendliness and hospitality.

Harmlessness and purity.

Lack of mindfulness and lack of situational awareness.

Mindfulness and situational awareness.

Not guarding the sense doors and eating too much.

Guarding the sense doors and moderation in eating.

The power of reflection and the power of development.[^335]

The power of mindfulness and the power of immersion.

Serenity and discernment.

The basis of serenity and the basis of exertion.[^336]

Exertion, and not being scattered.

Failure in ethics and failure in view.

Accomplishment in ethics and accomplishment in view.

Purification of ethics and purification of view.

Purification of view and making an effort in line with that view.

Inspiration, and making a suitable effort when inspired by inspiring
places.

To never be content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying.

Knowledge and freedom.

Knowledge of ending and knowledge of non-arising.[^337]

These are the teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 3. Threes  {#threes .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by three that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by three?

*Three unskillful roots:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three skillful roots:* contentment, love, and understanding.

*Three ways of performing bad conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three ways of performing good conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three unskillful thoughts:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful thoughts:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful intentions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful intentions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful perceptions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful perceptions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful elements:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful elements:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Another three elements:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three elements:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Another three elements:* lower, middle, and higher.[^338]

*Three cravings:* for sensual pleasures, to continue existence, and to
end existence.

*Another three cravings:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three cravings:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Three fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of
precepts and observances.

*Three defilements:* sensuality, desire for continued existence, and
ignorance.

*Three realms of existence:* sensual, form, and formless.

*Three searches:* for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path.

*Three kinds of discrimination:* 'I'm better', 'I'm equal', and 'I'm
worse'.

*Three periods:* past, future, and present.

*Three extremes:* substantial reality, the origin of substantial
reality, and the cessation of substantial reality.[^339]

*Three feelings:* pleasure, pain, and neutral.

*Three forms of suffering:* the suffering inherent in painful feeling,
the suffering inherent in conditions, and the suffering inherent in
perishing.[^340]

*Three heaps:* the heap of surety in the wrong way, the heap of surety
in the right way, and the heap of lack of surety.[^341]

*Three darknesses:* one is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and lacking
confidence about the past, future, and present.[^342]

*Three things a Realized One need not hide:* The Realized One's behavior
by way of body, speech, and mind is pure. He has no misconduct in these
three ways that need be hidden, thinking: 'Don't let others find this
out about me!'[^343]

*Three possessions:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three fires:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Another three fires:* a fire for those worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, a fire for householders, and a fire for those worthy of a
religious donation.[^344]

*Threefold classification of the physical:* visible and resistant,
invisible and resistant, and invisible and non-resistant.[^345]

*Three choices:* good choices, bad choices, and imperturbable choices.

*Three individuals:* a trainee, an adept, and one who is neither a
trainee nor an adept.[^346]

*Three seniors:* a senior by birth, a senior in the teaching, and a
senior by convention.[^347]

*Three grounds for making merit:* giving, ethical conduct, and
meditation.

*Three grounds for accusations:* what is seen, heard, and suspected.

*Three kinds of sensual rebirth:* There are sentient beings who desire
what is present. They fall under the sway of presently arisen sensual
pleasures. Namely, humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld.
This is the first kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who
desire to create. Having repeatedly created, they fall under the sway of
sensual pleasures. Namely, the gods who love to imagine. This is the
second kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who desire
what is created by others. They fall under the sway of sensual pleasures
created by others. Namely, the gods who control what is imagined by
others. This is the third kind of sensual rebirth.[^348]

*Three kinds of pleasant rebirth:* There are sentient beings who, having
repeatedly given rise to it, dwell in pleasure. Namely, the gods of the
Divinity's host. This is the first pleasant rebirth. There are sentient
beings who are drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with pleasure.
Every so often they feel inspired to exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what
bliss!' Namely, the gods of streaming radiance. This is the second
pleasant rebirth. There are sentient beings who are drenched, steeped,
filled, and soaked with pleasure. Since they're truly content, they
experience pleasure. Namely, the gods of universal beauty. This is the
third pleasant rebirth.[^349]

*Three kinds of wisdom:* the wisdom of a trainee, the wisdom of an
adept, and the wisdom of one who is neither a trainee nor an
adept.[^350]

*Another three kinds of wisdom:* wisdom produced by thought, learning,
and meditation.[^351]

*Three weapons:* learning, seclusion, and wisdom.[^352]

*Three faculties:* the faculty of understanding that one's enlightenment
is imminent, the faculty of enlightenment, and the faculty of one who is
enlightened.[^353]

*Three eyes:* the eye of the flesh, the eye of clairvoyance, and the eye
of wisdom.

*Three trainings:* in higher ethics, higher mind, and higher wisdom.

*Three kinds of development:* the development of physical endurance, the
development of the mind, and the development of wisdom.[^354]

*Three unsurpassable qualities:* unsurpassable seeing, practice, and
freedom.[^355]

*Three kinds of immersion:* Immersion with placing the mind and keeping
it connected. Immersion without placing the mind, merely keeping it
connected. Immersion without placing the mind or keeping it
connected.[^356]

*Another three kinds of immersion:* emptiness, signless, and
undirected.[^357]

*Three purities:* purity of body, speech, and mind.[^358]

*Three kinds of sagacity:* sagacity of body, speech, and mind.[^359]

*Three skills:* skill in progress, skill in regress, and skill in
means.[^360]

*Three vanities:* the vanity of health, the vanity of youth, and the
vanity of life.[^361]

*Three ways of putting something in charge:* putting oneself, the world,
or the teaching in charge.[^362]

*Three topics of discussion:* You might discuss the past: 'That is how
it was in the past.' You might discuss the future: 'That is how it will
be in the future.' Or you might discuss the present: 'This is how it is
at present.'[^363]

*Three knowledges:* recollection of past lives, knowledge of the death
and rebirth of sentient beings, and knowledge of the ending of
defilements.

*Three meditative abidings:* the heavenly meditation, the divine
meditation, and the noble meditation.[^364]

*Three demonstrations:* The demonstration of psychic power, the
demonstration of revealing, and the demonstration of instruction.[^365]

These are the teachings grouped by three that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 4. Fours  {#fours .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by four?

*Four kinds of mindfulness meditation:* It's when a mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

*Four right efforts:* A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an
effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities
don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are
given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm,
try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are completed by development.

*Four bases of psychic power:* A mendicant develops the basis of psychic
power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active
effort.

*Four absorptions:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

*Four ways of developing immersion further:* There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in this
life. There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision. There is a way of developing immersion
further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
blissful meditation in this life? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ... fourth
absorption. This is the way of developing immersion further that leads
to blissful meditation in this life.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision? A mendicant applies their mind to the
perception of light, focusing on the perception of day regardless of
whether it's night or day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart,
they develop a mind that's full of radiance. This is the way of
developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
mindfulness and awareness? A mendicant knows feelings as they arise, as
they remain, and as they go away. They know perceptions as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. This is the way of developing
immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the
ending of defilements? A mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in
the five grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such are feelings ... perceptions ...
choices ... consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is
the ending of consciousness.' This is the way of developing immersion
further that leads to the ending of defilements.[^366]

*Four limitless states:* A mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of
love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the
fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around,
they spread a heart full of love to the whole world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. They meditate
spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will.[^367]

*Four formless states:* A mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[^368]

*Four supports:* After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things, endures
some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.[^369]

*Four noble traditions:* A mendicant is content with any kind of robe,
and praises such contentment. They don't try to get hold of a robe in an
improper way. They don't get upset if they don't get a robe. And if they
do get a robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawback, and understanding the escape. And on account of that they
don't glorify themselves or put others down. A mendicant who is deft,
tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient,
primordial noble tradition.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of almsfood ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings ...

Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys giving up and loves to give up. They
enjoy meditation and love to meditate. But they don't glorify themselves
or put down others on account of their love for giving up and
meditation. A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in
this is said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble tradition.[^370]

*Four efforts:* The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to
preserve.[^371] And what is the effort to restrain? When a mendicant
sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. This is
called the effort to restrain.

And what is the effort to give up? It's when a mendicant doesn't
tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that's arisen, but gives
it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. They don't
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them
up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called
the effort to give up.

And what is the effort to develop? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. This is
called the effort to develop.

And what is the effort to preserve? It's when a mendicant preserves a
meditation subject that's a fine basis of immersion: the perception of a
skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse,
or a bloated corpse. This is called the effort to preserve.

*Four knowledges:* knowledge of the present phenomena, inferential
knowledge, knowledge of others' minds, and conventional knowledge.[^372]

*Another four knowledges:* knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.

*Four factors of stream-entry:* associating with true persons, listening
to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in
line with the teaching.[^373]

*Four factors of a stream-enterer:* A noble disciple has experiential
confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They have experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' They have
experiential confidence in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.[^374]

*Four fruits of the ascetic life:* stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and perfection.[^375]

*Four elements:* earth, water, fire, and air.

*Four foods:* solid food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the
second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth.[^376]

*Four bases for consciousness to remain:* As long as consciousness
remains, it remains involved with form, supported by form, founded on
form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it grows, increases, and
matures. Or consciousness remains involved with feeling ... Or
consciousness remains involved with perception ... Or as long as
consciousness remains, it remains involved with choices, supported by
choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it
grows, increases, and matures.[^377]

*Four prejudices:* making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice.[^378]

*Four things that give rise to craving:* Craving arises in a mendicant
for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that
state.[^379]

*Four ways of practice:* painful practice with slow insight, painful
practice with swift insight, pleasant practice with slow insight, and
pleasant practice with swift insight.[^380]

*Another four ways of practice:* impatient practice, patient practice,
taming practice, and calming practice.

*Four footprints of the Dhamma:* contentment, good will, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.[^381]

*Four ways of taking up practices:* There is a way of taking up
practices that is painful now and results in future pain. There is a way
of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future
pleasure. There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that is
pleasant now and results in future pleasure.

*Four spectrums of the teaching:* ethics, immersion, wisdom, and
freedom.

*Four powers:* energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.[^382]

*Four foundations:* the foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and
peace.[^383]

*Four ways of answering questions:* There is a question that should be
answered categorically. There is a question that should be answered
analytically. There is a question that should be answered with a
counter-question. There is a question that should be set aside.[^384]

*Four deeds:* There are deeds that are dark with dark result. There are
deeds that are bright with bright result. There are deeds that are dark
and bright with dark and bright result.[^385] There are neither dark nor
bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the
ending of deeds.[^386]

*Four things to be realized:* Past lives are to be realized with
recollection. The passing away and rebirth of sentient beings is to be
realized with vision. The eight liberations are to be realized with
direct meditative experience. The ending of defilements is to be
realized with wisdom.[^387]

*Four floods:* the floods of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[^388]

*Four yokes:* the yokes of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[^389]

*Four unyokings:* unyoking from the yokes of sensuality, desire for
rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*Four ties:* the personal ties to covetousness, ill will,
misapprehension of precepts and observances, and the insistence that
this is the only truth.[^390]

*Four kinds of grasping:* grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts
and observances, and theories of a self.

*Four kinds of reproduction:* reproduction for creatures born from an
egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously.[^391]

*Four kinds of conception:* Someone is unaware when conceived in their
mother's womb, unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge.
This is the first kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when
conceived in their mother's womb, but unaware as they remain there, and
unaware as they emerge. This is the second kind of conception.
Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived
in their mother's womb, aware as they remain there, and aware as they
emerge. This is the fourth kind of conception.[^392]

*Four kinds of reincarnation in a life-form:* There is a reincarnation
in a life-form where only one's own intention is effective, not that of
others. There is a reincarnation in a life-form where only the intention
of others is effective, not one's own. There is a reincarnation in a
life-form where both one's own and others' intentions are effective.
There is a reincarnation in a life-form where neither one's own nor
others' intentions are effective.[^393]

*Four ways of purifying a religious donation:* There's a religious
donation that's purified by the giver, not the recipient. There's a
religious donation that's purified by the recipient, not the giver.
There's a religious donation that's purified by neither the giver nor
the recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified by both the
giver and the recipient.[^394]

*Four ways of being inclusive:* giving, kindly words, taking care, and
equality.[^395]

*Four ignoble expressions:* speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical.[^396]

*Four noble expressions:* refraining from speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought,
or known something, but you haven't.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you haven't.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you have.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought, or
known something, and you have.

*Four persons:* One person mortifies themselves, committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves. One person mortifies others,
committed to the practice of mortifying others. One person mortifies
themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying
themselves and others. One person doesn't mortify either themselves or
others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or
others. They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine.[^397]

*Another four persons:* One person practices to benefit themselves, but
not others. One person practices to benefit others, but not themselves.
One person practices to benefit neither themselves nor others. One
person practices to benefit both themselves and others.

*Another four persons:* the dark bound for darkness, the dark bound for
light, the light bound for darkness, and the light bound for
light.[^398]

*Another four persons:* the confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic,
the pink lotus ascetic, and the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.[^399]

These are the teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

### 5. Fives  {#fives .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by five?

*Five aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.[^400]

*Five grasping aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

*Five kinds of sensual stimulation:* Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

*Five destinations:* hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity,
and the gods.[^401]

*Five kinds of stinginess:* stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings.[^402]

*Five hindrances:* sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

*Five lower fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, sensual desire, and ill will.

*Five higher fetters:* desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form,
desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and
ignorance.

*Five precepts:* refraining from killing living creatures, stealing,
sexual misconduct, lying, and consuming beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants.

*Five things that can't be done:* A mendicant with defilements ended
can't deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something
with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store
up goods for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay
person.[^403]

*Five losses:* loss of relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and view. It
is not because of loss of relatives, wealth, or health that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics
or view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.[^404]

*Five endowments:* endowment with relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and
view. It is not because of endowment with family, wealth, or health that
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. It is because of endowment with ethics or
view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

*Five drawbacks for an unethical person because of their failure in
ethics:* Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
gets a bad reputation. This is the second drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and embarrassed,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
feels lost when they die. This is the fourth drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. This is the fifth
drawback.[^405]

*Five benefits for an ethical person because of their accomplishment in
ethics:* Firstly, an ethical person gains great wealth on account of
diligence. This is the first benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person
gets a good reputation. This is the second benefit. Furthermore, an
ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and self-assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person dies
not feeling lost. This is the fourth benefit. Furthermore, when an
ethical person's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth benefit.

*A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first establish five
things in themselves:* I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong
time. I will speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not
harshly. I will speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak
lovingly, not from secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another
should first establish these five things in themselves.[^406]

*Five factors that support meditation:* A mendicant has faith in the
Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely ill or unwell. Their
stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or deceitful. They
reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual
companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful
qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly
vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful
qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing
away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of
suffering.[^407]

*Five pure abodes:* Aviha, Atappa, the gods fair to see, the fair seeing
gods, and [Akaniṭṭha]{lang="sa"}.[^408]

*Five non-returners:* one who is extinguished between one life and the
next, one who is extinguished upon landing, one who is extinguished
without extra effort, one who is extinguished with extra effort, and one
who heads upstream, going to the [Akaniṭṭha]{lang="sa"} realm.[^409]

*Five kinds of hard-heartedness:* Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about
the Teacher. They're uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first kind of hard-heartedness.
Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset
with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness.[^410]

*Five shackles of the heart:* Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed,
desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
This being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first shackle of the heart.
Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
bellies are full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one
of the orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or
fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart.[^411]

*Five faculties:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.

*Another five faculties:* pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and
equanimity.

*Another five faculties:* faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom.

*Five elements of escape:* Take a case where a mendicant focuses on
sensual pleasures, but on that their mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided. But when they focus on
renunciation, on that their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided. Their mind is in a good state, well
developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from sensual
pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don't experience that
kind of feeling. This is how the escape from sensual pleasures is
explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.[^412]

*Five opportunities for freedom:* Firstly, the Teacher or a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. That mendicant feels
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how
the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches it. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.
This is the first opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. ...
Or the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or the mendicant thinks about and considers the
teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in
that Dhamma, no matter how a meditation subject as a basis of immersion
is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed. This is the fifth opportunity for freedom.[^413]

*Five perceptions that ripen in freedom:* the perception of
impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence, the
perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up, and
the perception of fading away.[^414]

These are the teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 6. Sixes  {#sixes .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by six?

*Six interior sense fields:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six exterior sense fields:* sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches,
and ideas.

*Six classes of consciousness:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
consciousness.

*Six classes of contact:* contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, and mind.

*Six classes of feeling:* feeling born of contact through the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six classes of perception:* perceptions of sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six bodies of intention:* intention regarding sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six classes of craving:* craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touches, and ideas.

*Six kinds of disrespect:* A mendicant lacks respect and reverence for
the Teacher, the teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the training,
diligence, and hospitality.[^415]

*Six kinds of respect:* A mendicant has respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the training,
diligence, and hospitality.[^416]

*Six preoccupations with happiness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for happiness. Hearing a sound
with the ear ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor
with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, one is
preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for happiness.[^417]

*Six preoccupations with sadness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for sadness. ... Knowing an idea
with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for
sadness.

*Six preoccupations with equanimity:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one
is preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for equanimity. ... Knowing
an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis
for equanimity.

*Six warm-hearted qualities:* Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats
their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in
private. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. This
warm-hearted quality too makes for fondness and respect, conducing to
inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.[^418]

*Six roots of arguments:* Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and
acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, and they don't
fulfill the training. They create a dispute in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"},
which is for the detriment and suffering of the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... They're devious and deceitful ... They have
corrupt wishes and wrong view ... They're attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

*Six elements:* earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

*Six elements of escape:* Take a mendicant who says: 'I've developed the
heart's release by love. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my
basis, kept it up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet
somehow ill will still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the heart's
release by love has been developed and properly implemented, yet somehow
ill will still occupies the mind. For it is the heart's release by love
that is the escape from ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow discontent
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by rejoicing that is the escape from
discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow desire
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by equanimity that is the escape from
desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow my
consciousness still follows after signs.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! ... For it is the signless release of the heart that is the
escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupy the mind. For
it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from the
dart of doubt and indecision.'[^419]

*Six unsurpassable things:* the unsurpassable seeing, listening,
acquisition, training, service, and recollection.[^420]

*Six topics for recollection:* the recollection of the Buddha, the
teaching, the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, ethics, generosity, and the deities.

*Six consistent responses:* A mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes,
is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.
Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor with their nose ...
Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a touch with their body
... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad. They
remain equanimous, mindful and aware.[^421]

*Six classes of rebirth:* Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a
dark result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright
result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to extinguishment,
which is neither dark nor bright. Someone born into a bright class gives
rise to a bright result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
a dark result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.[^422]

*Six perceptions that help penetration:* the perception of impermanence,
the perception of suffering in impermanence, the perception of not-self
in suffering, the perception of giving up, the perception of fading
away, and the perception of cessation.[^423]

These are the teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 7. Sevens  {#sevens .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by seven?

*Seven riches of the noble ones:* the riches of faith, ethics,
conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom.[^424]

*Seven awakening factors:* mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

*Seven prerequisites for immersion:* right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right
mindfulness.[^425]

*Seven bad qualities:* a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent,
unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and witless.[^426]

*Seven good qualities:* a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.[^427]

*Seven aspects of the teachings of the true persons:* a mendicant knows
the teachings, knows the meaning, knows themselves, knows moderation,
knows the right time, knows assemblies, and knows people.[^428]

*Seven qualifications for graduation:* A mendicant has a keen enthusiasm
to undertake the training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of
desires ... for retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and
alertness ... to penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these
desires in the future.[^429]

*Seven perceptions:* the perception of impermanence, the perception of
not-self, the perception of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the
perception of giving up, the perception of fading away, and the
perception of cessation.[^430]

*Seven powers:* faith, energy, conscience, prudence, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom.[^431]

*Seven planes of consciousness:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.[^432]

*Seven persons worthy of a religious donation:* one freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, and a follower by faith.

*Seven underlying tendencies:* sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven fetters:* attraction, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to
be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven principles for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that
might arise:* Resolution face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through
recollection to be granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be
granted. Acting according to what has been admitted. Majority decision.
Further penalty. Covering over as if with grass.[^433]

These are the teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

:::: Center
::: small
*The second recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

### 8. Eights  {#eights .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by eight?

*Eight wrong ways:* wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion.

*Eight right ways:* right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

*Eight persons worthy of a religious donation:* The stream-enterer and
the one practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. The
once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and the one practicing for
perfection.

*Eight grounds for laziness:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do.
They think: 'I have some work to do. But while doing it my body will get
tired. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the second ground for
laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the fourth
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy and unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load
of beans. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the seventh
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for laziness.[^434]

*Eight grounds for arousing energy:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work
to do. They think: 'I have some work to do. While working it's not easy
to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively
rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized.' They rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up
energy... This is the second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the fifth
ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the sixth ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the
seventh ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

*Eight reasons to give:* A person might give a gift after insulting the
recipient. Or they give out of fear. Or they give thinking, 'They gave
to me.' Or they give thinking, 'They'll give to me.' Or they give
thinking, 'It's good to give.' Or they give thinking, 'I cook, they
don't. It wouldn't be right for me to not give to them.' Or they give
thinking, 'By giving this gift I'll get a good reputation.' Or they give
thinking, 'This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.'[^435]

*Eight rebirths by giving:* First, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins
such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. Whatever they give they expect
back. They see an affluent aristocrat or brahmin or householder amusing
themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death,
I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins
or householders!'[^436] They settle on that thought, stabilize it, and
develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed further, their
thought leads to rebirth there.[^437] But I say that this is only for
those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's wish of an
ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard:[^438] 'The gods of the four great kings
are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when
my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods of the four great kings!' They settle on that thought, stabilize
it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed
further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that this is
only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's
wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard: 'The gods of the thirty-three ... the
gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ...
the gods who control what is imagined by others are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not
developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that
this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The
heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. Whatever they give they expect back. And they've heard: 'The
gods of the Divinity's host are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.'
They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be
reborn in the company of the gods of the Divinity's host!' They settle
on that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for
less and not developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there.
But I say that this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the
unethical. And for those free of desire, not those with desire.[^439]
The heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their freedom
from desire.[^440]

*Eight assemblies:* the assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great
kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of
[Māras]{lang="sa"}. An assembly of divinities.[^441]

*Eight worldly conditions:* gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and
praise, pleasure and pain.[^442]

*Eight dimensions of mastery:* Perceiving form internally, someone sees
forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they
perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower
that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the eighth dimension of mastery.[^443]

*Eight liberations:* Having physical form, they see forms. This is the
first liberation.

Not perceiving physical form internally, they see forms externally. This
is the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.[^444]

These are the teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 9. Nines  {#nines .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by nine?

*Nine grounds for resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to me,' you
harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing wrong to me' ... 'They will
do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong by someone I love' ... 'They are
doing wrong by someone I love' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I
love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ... 'They are helping someone
I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike,' you harbor
resentment.[^445]

*Nine methods to get rid of resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to
me, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment. Thinking:
'They are doing wrong to me ...' ... 'They will do wrong to me ...' ...
'They did wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They are doing wrong by
someone I love ...' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I love ...' ...
'They helped someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I
dislike ...' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what
can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment.

*Nine abodes of sentient beings:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.[^446]

*Nine lost opportunities for spiritual practice:* Firstly, a Realized
One has arisen in the world. He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace,
extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person
has been reborn in hell. This is the first lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn among the titans. This is the fourth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the fifth
lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go.[^447] This is the sixth
lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the seventh lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, idiotic, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the eighth lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, no Realized One has arisen in the world, so there is no
teaching of the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person is reborn in a central country.
And they're wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well
said from what is poorly said. This is the ninth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.[^448]

*Nine progressive meditations:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. Going totally beyond perceptions
of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception
and feeling.[^449]

*Nine progressive cessations:* For someone who has attained the first
absorption, sensual perceptions have ceased. For someone who has
attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected have ceased. For someone who has attained the third
absorption, rapture has ceased. For someone who has attained the fourth
absorption, breathing has ceased. For someone who has attained the
dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. For
someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. For someone
who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For someone who has
attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the
perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. For someone who
has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and
feeling have ceased.[^450]

These are the teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

### 10. Tens  {#tens .unnumbered}

There are teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by ten?

*Ten qualities that serve as protector:* Firstly, a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is a quality that
serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long
ago.[^451] This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as
protector.[^452]

*Ten universal dimensions of meditation:* Someone perceives the
meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and
limitless. They perceive the meditation on universal water ... the
meditation on universal fire ... the meditation on universal air ... the
meditation on universal blue ... the meditation on universal yellow ...
the meditation on universal red ... the meditation on universal white
... the meditation on universal space ... They perceive the meditation
on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and
limitless.[^453]

*Ten ways of doing unskillful deeds:* killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view.

*Ten ways of doing skillful deeds:* refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will,
and right view.

*Ten abodes of the noble ones:* A mendicant has given up five factors,
possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has
eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given
up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical
process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? A mendicant, seeing a
sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous,
mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor
with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a
touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're
neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. That's
how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated,
thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.
That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when they've
given up sensual, malicious, and cruel intentions. That's how a
mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.[^454]

*Ten qualities of an adept:* an adept's right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.[^455]

Reverends, these are the teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"},
"Good, good, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}! It's good that you've taught this
exposition of the reciting in concert."

That is what Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said, and the teacher
approved. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}
said.

## N 34 Up to Ten  *Dasuttarasutta* {#n-34-up-to-ten-dasuttarasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Campā]{lang="sa"} on the banks of the [Gaggarā]{lang="sa"} Lotus Pond
together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of five hundred
mendicants.[^456] There [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} addressed the
mendicants:[^457] "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said this:

> "I will relate the teachings[^458]\
> up to ten for attaining extinguishment,\
> for making an end of suffering,\
> the release from all ties.[^459]

### 1. Groups of One  {#groups-of-one .unnumbered}

Reverends, one thing is helpful, one thing should be developed, one
thing should be completely understood, one thing should be given up, one
thing makes things worse, one thing leads to distinction, one thing is
hard to comprehend, one thing should be produced, one thing should be
directly known, one thing should be realized.[^460]

*What one thing is helpful?* Diligence in skillful qualities.[^461]

*What one thing should be developed?* Mindfulness of the body that is
full of pleasure.[^462]

*What one thing should be completely understood?* Contact, which is
accompanied by defilements and is prone to fuel grasping.[^463]

*What one thing should be given up?* The conceit 'I am'.

*What one thing makes things worse?* Irrational application of mind.

*What one thing leads to distinction?* Rational application of mind.

*What one thing is hard to comprehend?* The heart's immersion of
immediate result.[^464]

*What one thing should be produced?* Unshakable knowledge.

*What one thing should be directly known?* All sentient beings are
sustained by food.

*What one thing should be realized?* The unshakable release of the
heart.

So these ten things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 2. Groups of Two  {#groups-of-two .unnumbered}

Two things are helpful, two things should be developed, two things
should be completely understood, two things should be given up, two
things make things worse, two things lead to distinction, two things are
hard to comprehend, two things should be produced, two things should be
directly known, two things should be realized.[^465]

*What two things are helpful?* Mindfulness and situational awareness.

*What two things should be developed?* Serenity and discernment.

*What two things should be completely understood?* Name and form.

*What two things should be given up?* Ignorance and craving for
continued existence.

*What two things make things worse?* Being hard to admonish and having
bad friends.

*What two things lead to distinction?* Being easy to admonish and having
good friends.

*What two things are hard to comprehend?* What are the causes and
reasons for the corruption of sentient beings, and what are the causes
and reasons for the purification of sentient beings.

*What two things should be produced?* Two knowledges: knowledge of
ending, and knowledge of non-arising.

*What two things should be directly known?* Two elements: the
conditioned element and the unconditioned element.[^466]

*What two things should be realized?* Knowledge and freedom.

So these twenty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 3. Groups of Three  {#groups-of-three .unnumbered}

Three things are helpful, etc.

*What three things are helpful?* Associating with true persons,
listening to the true teaching, and practicing in line with the
teaching.[^467]

*What three things should be developed?* Three kinds of immersion.
Immersion with placing the mind and keeping it connected. Immersion
without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. Immersion without
placing the mind or keeping it connected.

*What three things should be completely understood?* Three feelings:
pleasant, painful, and neutral.

*What three things should be given up?* Three cravings: craving for
sensual pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving to end
existence.

*What three things make things worse?* Three unskillful roots: greed,
hate, and delusion.

*What three things lead to distinction?* Three skillful roots:
contentment, love, and understanding.

*What three things are hard to comprehend?* Three elements of escape.
Renunciation is the escape from sensual pleasures. The formless is the
escape from form. Cessation is the escape from whatever is created,
conditioned, and dependently originated.[^468]

*What three things should be produced?* Three knowledges: knowledge
regarding the past portion, the future portion, and the present
portion.[^469]

*What three things should be directly known?* Three elements:
sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*What three things should be realized?* Three knowledges: recollection
of past lives, knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings,
and knowledge of the ending of defilements.

So these thirty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 4. Groups of Four  {#groups-of-four .unnumbered}

Four things are helpful, etc.

*What four things are helpful?* Four situations: living in a suitable
region, relying on true persons, being rightly resolved in oneself, and
past merit.[^470]

*What four things should be developed?* The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. A mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.

*What four things should be completely understood?* Four foods: solid
food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the second, mental intention
the third, and consciousness the fourth.

*What four things should be given up?* Four floods: sensuality, desire
for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things make things worse?* Four yokes: the yokes of
sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things lead to distinction?* Four kinds of unyoking: unyoking
from the yokes of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*What four things are hard to comprehend?* Four kinds of immersion:
immersion liable to decline, stable immersion, immersion that leads to
distinction, and immersion that leads to penetration.[^471]

*What four things should be produced?* Four knowledges: knowledge of the
present phenomena, inferential knowledge, knowledge of others' minds,
and conventional knowledge.

*What four things should be directly known?* The four noble truths:
suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

*What four things should be realized?* Four fruits of the ascetic life:
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection.

So these forty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 5. Groups of Five  {#groups-of-five .unnumbered}

Five things are helpful, etc.

*What five things are helpful?* Five factors that support meditation. A
mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely
ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or
deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible
spiritual companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering.

*What five things should be developed?* Right immersion with five
factors: pervasion with rapture, pervasion with pleasure, pervasion with
mind, pervasion with light, and the basis for reviewing.[^472]

*What five things should be completely understood?* Five grasping
aggregates: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

*What five things should be given up?* Five hindrances: sensual desire,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

*What five things make things worse?* Five kinds of hard-heartedness.
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness. Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts
about the teaching ... the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ... the training ... A
mendicant is angry and upset with their spiritual companions, resentful
and closed off. This being so, their mind doesn't incline toward
keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the fifth kind
of hard-heartedness.

*What five things lead to distinction?* Five faculties: faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

*What five things are hard to comprehend?* Five elements of escape. A
mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but on that their mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided. But when
they focus on renunciation, on that their mind leaps forth, gains
confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. Their mind is in a good
state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from
sensual pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don't
experience that kind of feeling. This is how the escape from sensual
pleasures is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.

*What five things should be produced?* Right immersion with five
knowledges. The following knowledges arise for you personally: 'This
immersion is blissful now, and results in bliss in the future.' 'This
immersion is noble and not of the flesh.' 'This immersion is not
cultivated by sinners.' 'This immersion is peaceful and sublime and
tranquil and unified, not held in place by forceful suppression.' 'I
mindfully enter into and emerge from this immersion.'

*What five things should be directly known?* Five opportunities for
freedom. Firstly, the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches
Dhamma to a mendicant. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how the Teacher or a respected
spiritual companion teaches it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the first opportunity for
freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it.
That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that
Dhamma, no matter how they teach it in detail to others as they learned
and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful,
rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes
tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful,
the mind becomes immersed. This is the second opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma. But the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning
and the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how they recite it in detail
as they learned and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the third opportunity
for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching. But the
mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart,
examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. That
mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma,
no matter how they think about and consider it in their heart, examining
it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. Feeling inspired, joy
springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels
bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed. This is the fourth
opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching ... or
think about it. But a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in
that Dhamma, no matter how a meditation subject as a basis of immersion
is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed. This is the fifth opportunity for freedom.

*What five things should be realized?* Five spectrums of the teaching:
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom.

So these fifty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 6. Groups of Six  {#groups-of-six .unnumbered}

Six things are helpful, etc.

*What six things are helpful?* Six warm-hearted qualities. Firstly, a
mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with bodily
kindness, both in public and in private. This warm-hearted quality makes
for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity,
without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

*What six things should be developed?* Six topics for recollection: the
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"},
ethics, generosity, and the deities.

*What six things should be completely understood?* Six interior sense
fields: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*What six things should be given up?* Six classes of craving: craving
for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.

*What six things make things worse?* Six kinds of disrespect. A
mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and
the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the training, diligence, and hospitality.

*What six things lead to distinction?* Six kinds of respect. A mendicant
has respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the training, diligence, and hospitality.

*What six things are hard to comprehend?* Six elements of escape. Take a
mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by love. I've
cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it up, consolidated
it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow ill will still occupies my
mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! Don't say that. Don't
misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha is not
good. And the Buddha would not say that. It's impossible, reverend, it
cannot happen that the heart's release by love has been developed and
properly implemented, yet somehow ill will still occupies the mind. For
it is the heart's release by love that is the escape from ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. ... Yet somehow discontent still occupies my mind.' They
should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by
rejoicing that is the escape from discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. ... Yet somehow desire still occupies my mind.' They should
be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by
equanimity that is the escape from desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. ... Yet somehow my consciousness still follows after signs.'
They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ... For it is the signless
release of the heart that is the escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupy the mind. For
it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from the
dart of doubt and indecision.'

*What six things should be produced?* Six consistent responses. A
mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad.
They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their
ears ... Smelling an odor with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with
their tongue ...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware.

*What six things should be directly known?* Six unsurpassable things:
the unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection.

*What six things should be realized?* Six direct knowledges. A mendicant
wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful;
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

So these sixty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal, not
otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 7. Groups of Seven  {#groups-of-seven .unnumbered}

Seven things are helpful, etc.

*What seven things are helpful?* Seven riches of the noble ones: the
riches of faith, ethics, conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.

*What seven things should be developed?* Seven awakening factors:
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity.

*What seven things should be completely understood?* Seven planes of
consciousness. There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and
diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld. This is the first plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.

*What seven things should be given up?* Seven underlying tendencies:
sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn,
and ignorance.

*What seven things make things worse?* Seven bad qualities: a mendicant
is faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless.

*What seven things lead to distinction?* Seven good qualities: a
mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic,
mindful, and wise.

*What seven things are hard to comprehend?* Seven aspects of the
teachings of the true persons: a mendicant knows the teachings, knows
the meaning, knows themselves, knows moderation, knows the right time,
knows assemblies, and knows people.

*What seven things should be produced?* Seven perceptions: the
perception of impermanence, the perception of not-self, the perception
of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the perception of giving up,
the perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation.

*What seven things should be directly known?* Seven qualifications for
graduation. A mendicant has a keen enthusiasm to undertake the training
... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of desires ... for retreat
... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and alertness ... to
penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these desires in the
future.

*What seven things should be realized?* Seven powers of one who has
ended the defilements. Firstly, a mendicant with defilements ended has
clearly seen with right wisdom all conditions as truly impermanent. This
is a power that a mendicant who has ended the defilements relies on to
claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has clearly seen with
right wisdom that sensual pleasures are truly like a pit of glowing
coals. ...

Furthermore, the mind of a mendicant with defilements ended slants,
slopes, and inclines to seclusion. They're withdrawn, loving
renunciation, and have totally eliminated defiling influences. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
five faculties. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
seven awakening factors. ...

Furthermore, a mendicant with defilements ended has well developed the
noble eightfold path. ... This is a power that a mendicant who has ended
the defilements relies on to claim: 'My defilements have ended.'

So these seventy things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

:::: Center
::: small
*The first recitation section is finished.*
:::
::::

### 8. Groups of Eight  {#groups-of-eight .unnumbered}

Eight things are helpful, etc.

*What eight things are helpful?* There are eight causes and reasons that
lead to acquiring the wisdom fundamental to the spiritual life, and to
its increase, growth, development, and fulfillment once it has been
acquired. What eight? It's when a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher
or a spiritual companion in a teacher's role. And they set up a keen
sense of conscience and prudence for them, with warmth and respect. This
is the first cause.

When a mendicant lives relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion
in a teacher's role---with a keen sense of conscience and prudence for
them, with warmth and respect---from time to time they go and ask them
questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this? What does that mean?' Those
venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is the second cause.

After hearing that teaching they perfect withdrawal of both body and
mind. This is the third cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is the fourth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This is the
fifth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the sixth cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This is the seventh cause.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in the five
grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is
the ending of form. Such is feeling, such is the origin of feeling, such
is the ending of feeling. Such is perception, such is the origin of
perception, such is the ending of perception. Such are choices, such is
the origin of choices, such is the ending of choices. Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' This is the eighth cause.[^473]

*What eight things should be developed?* The noble eightfold path, that
is: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

*What eight things should be completely understood?* Eight worldly
conditions: gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure
and pain.

*What eight things should be given up?* Eight wrong ways: wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion.

*What eight things make things worse?* Eight grounds for laziness.
Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work
to do. But while doing it my body will get tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the second ground for
laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the fourth
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.'... This is the fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy, unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load of
beans. I'd better have a lie down.'... They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the seventh
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the eighth ground for laziness.

*What eight things lead to distinction?* Eight grounds for arousing
energy. Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have
some work to do. While working it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized.' They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving
the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground
for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the
second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up
energy.'... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up
energy.'... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the fifth ground for arousing
energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy.'... This is the sixth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.'... This is the seventh ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

*What eight things are hard to comprehend?* Eight lost opportunities for
spiritual practice. Firstly, a Realized One has arisen in the world. He
teaches the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person has been reborn in hell. This
is the first lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world.[^474] But person
has been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the
fourth lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go. This is the fifth lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the sixth lost opportunity
for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, idiotic, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the seventh lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, no Realized One has arisen in the world,[^475] so there is
no teaching of the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening,
as proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person is reborn in a central
country. And they're wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what
is well said from what is poorly said. This is the eighth lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

*What eight things should be produced?* Eight thoughts of a great man.
'This teaching is for those of few wishes, not those of many wishes.
It's for the contented, not those who lack contentment. It's for the
secluded, not those who enjoy company. It's for the energetic, not the
lazy. It's for the mindful, not the unmindful. It's for those with
immersion, not those without immersion. It's for the wise, not the
witless. This teaching is for those who don't enjoy proliferating, not
for those who enjoy proliferating.'[^476]

*What eight things should be directly known?* Eight dimensions of
mastery. Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower
that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the eighth dimension of mastery.

*What eight things should be realized?* Eight liberations. Having
physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving physical form internally, someone see forms externally.
This is the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

So these eighty things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 9. Groups of Nine  {#groups-of-nine .unnumbered}

Nine things are helpful, etc.

*What nine things are helpful?* Nine things rooted in rational
application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, joy springs up.
When you're joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel
bliss. And when you're blissful, the mind becomes immersed. When your
mind is immersed, you truly know and see. When you truly know and see,
you grow disillusioned. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When
desire fades away you're freed.[^477]

*What nine things should be developed?* Nine factors of trying to be
pure. The factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind, view, overcoming
doubt, knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the
path, knowledge and vision of the practice, knowledge and vision,
wisdom, and freedom.[^478]

*What nine things should be completely understood?* Nine abodes of
sentient beings. There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and
diverse in perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld. This is the first abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.

*What nine things should be given up?* Nine things rooted in craving.
Craving is a cause of seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material
things. Gaining material things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is
a cause of desire and lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment.
Attachment is a cause of ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess.
Stinginess is a cause of safeguarding. Owing to safeguarding, many bad,
unskillful things come to be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels,
arguments, disputes, accusations, divisive speech, and lies.[^479]

*What nine things make things worse?* Nine grounds for resentment.
Thinking: 'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They
are doing wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did
wrong by someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love'
... 'They will do wrong by someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I
dislike' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They
will help someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment.

*What nine things lead to distinction?* Nine methods to get rid of
resentment. Thinking: 'They did wrong to me, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing wrong to me
...' ... 'They will do wrong to me ...' ... 'They did wrong by someone I
love ...' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They
will do wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They helped someone I dislike
...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ... Thinking: 'They
will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid of
resentment.

*What nine things are hard to comprehend?* Nine kinds of diversity.
Diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of
contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of feelings
gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives
rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to
diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of
passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.
Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains.[^480]

*What nine things should be produced?* Nine perceptions: the perceptions
of ugliness, death, repulsiveness in food, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self in
suffering, giving up, and fading away.[^481]

*What nine things should be directly known?* Nine progressive
meditations. A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption. Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension
of infinite space. Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space,
aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. Going totally beyond the dimension
of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they
enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. Going totally beyond
the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. Going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and
remain in the cessation of perception and feeling.

*What nine things should be realized?* Nine progressive cessations. For
someone who has attained the first absorption, sensual perceptions have
ceased. For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing
of the mind and keeping it connected have ceased. For someone who has
attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased. For someone who has
attained the fourth absorption, breathing has ceased. For someone who
has attained the dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has
ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the perception of the dimension of infinite space has
ceased. For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For
someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has
ceased. For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and
feeling, perception and feeling have ceased.

So these ninety things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One.

### 10. Groups of Ten  {#groups-of-ten .unnumbered}

Ten things are helpful, ten things should be developed, ten things
should be completely understood, ten things should be given up, ten
things make things worse, ten things lead to distinction, ten things are
hard to comprehend, ten things should be produced, ten things should be
directly known, ten things should be realized.

*What ten things are helpful?* Ten qualities that serve as protector.
First, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is learned. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is energetic. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

*What ten things should be developed?* Ten universal dimensions of
meditation. Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above,
below, across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless.

*What ten things should be completely understood?* Ten sense fields: eye
and sights, ear and sounds, nose and smells, tongue and tastes, body and
touches.

*What ten things should be given up?* Ten wrong ways: wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.

*What ten things make things worse?* Ten ways of doing unskillful deeds:
killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and
wrong view.

*What ten things lead to distinction?* Ten ways of doing skillful deeds:
refraining from killing living creatures, stealing, and sexual
misconduct; avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view.

*What ten things are hard to comprehend?* Ten abodes of the noble ones.
A mendicant has given up five factors, possesses six factors, has a
single guard, has four supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth, has totally given up searching, has
unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical process, and is well
freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? A mendicant, seeing a
sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous,
mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor
with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue ...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware. That's how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated,
thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.
That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when they've
given up sensual, malicious, and cruel intentions. That's how a
mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? Giving up pleasure
and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain
in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled the physical
process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.

*What ten things should be produced?* Ten perceptions: the perceptions
of ugliness, death, repulsiveness in food, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self in
suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation.[^482]

*What ten things should be directly known?* Ten grounds for wearing
away. For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. For
one of right intention, wrong intention is worn away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is worn away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is worn away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is worn away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
worn away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn
away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. ...
For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. ... For one of
right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. And the many bad, unskillful
qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away.

*What ten things should be realized?* Ten qualities of an adept: an
adept's right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom.[^483]

So these hundred things that are true, real, and accurate, not unreal,
not otherwise were rightly understood by the Realized One." This is what
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said. Satisfied, the mendicants
approved what [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said.

::: Center
THE LONG DISCOURSES ARE COMPLETED.
:::

## Colophon {#colophon .unnumbered}

### The Translator {#the-translator .unnumbered}

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main [Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

### Creation Process {#creation-process .unnumbered}

Primary source was the digital [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} edition of the
Pali [Tipiṭaka]{lang="sa"}. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi. Older
translations by Maurice Walshe and T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids were also
consulted.

### The Translation {#the-translation .unnumbered}

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
[Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

### About SuttaCentral {#about-suttacentral .unnumbered}

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

### About Bilara {#about-bilara .unnumbered}

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

### About SuttaCentral Editions {#about-suttacentral-editions .unnumbered}

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.

[^1]: This late sutta satirizes the failings of Sunakkhatta in a fashion
    so broad that it borders on slapstick. The town of Anupiya is
    mentioned only here.

[^2]: The Bhaggava clan was descended from the ancient sage Bhagu
    (Sanskrit [Bhṛgu]{lang="sa"}). They received the gift of fire
    conveyed by [Mātariśvan]{lang="sa"} the wind from the god Agni (eg.
    Rig Veda 1.60.1). In Pali they appear as potters (eg. [MN
    81:19.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato#19.3), [MN
    140:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#1.3), [SN
    1.50:11.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.50/en/sujato#11.2), [SN
    2.24:12.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.24/en/sujato#12.2)).
    Archaeologists refer to the strata around the Buddha's time as the
    Northern Black Polished Ware culture on account of the distinctive
    highly glazed polish that was achieved on the pottery of the time.
    This, together with the production of iron, marked a significant
    advance in the mastery of fire. Thus potters were no mere humble
    craftsmen, but leading technological innovators.

[^3]: Sunakkhatta's dismal spiritual career began when he met the Buddha
    in [MN 105](https://suttacentral.net/mn105/en/sujato). In [DN
    6:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn6/en/sujato#5.3) we learn that,
    after being ordained three years, he spoke of his limited success in
    meditation. The current sutta and [MN
    12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato) deal with Sunakkhatta's
    bitter criticisms of the Buddha shortly after his disrobal.

[^4]: A candidate for ordination is expected to go for refuge to the
    Buddha, and may be said to live dedicated (*uddissa*) to him ([Kd
    1:23.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#23.4.1)).
    Moreover, a noble disciple is unable to dedicate themselves to
    another teacher ([AN
    1.276:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an1.276/en/sujato#1.1)). But
    when the Buddha called candidates to go forth, he spoke of practice
    rather than personal devotion: "Come, monk. The Teaching is
    well-proclaimed. Practice the spiritual life to make a complete end
    of suffering." ([Kd
    1:6.32.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#6.32.3))

[^5]: He makes a similar criticism at [MN
    12:3.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#3.8).

[^6]: There are at least eight spellings for this tribe, including
    *thulu*, *bumu* and *khulu*. Below we meet a member of the ruling
    clan of the tribe named *korakhattiya*. I propose that *kora* is "of
    Kuru" by way of secondary derivation; cp. Koravya as a regular name
    for the kings of Kuru. Thus *korakhattiya* is not a personal name,
    but rather "the aristocrat of Kuru". The name of the city
    *[uttarakā]{lang="sa"}* means "northern", and Kuru is indeed
    northern. Occam's razor would urge us not to assume the existence of
    an otherwise unknown tribe on such a dubious term when it can be
    explained more parsimoniously as an ancient misspelling of Kuru. The
    Chinese at DA 15 (T 1, 67a15) has ("white clay"), which does not
    seem to clear it up.

[^7]: This practice is further described, along with the "cow vow", at
    [MN 57](https://suttacentral.net/mn57/en/sujato).

[^8]: "Holy man" is *[sādhurūpo]{lang="sa"}* (cp. [Dhp
    263](https://suttacentral.net/dhp263/en/sujato), [AN
    6.54:26.1](https://suttacentral.net/an6.54/en/sujato#26.1)).

[^9]: *Alasaka* is otherwise unknown in early Pali. Sanskrit medical
    texts describe it as flatulent indigestion. This agrees with the
    subcommentary's *[ajīraṇena]{lang="sa"} [āmarogena]{lang="sa"}*
    ("indigestion"). \| In this sutta, the Buddha is depicted as making
    specific predictions about the future, whereas normally he does not
    and probably cannot. Rather, he makes conditional predictions that
    if such courses are pursued, such results will follow.

[^10]: The terrifying [Kālakañjas]{lang="sa"} are mentioned at [DN
    20:12.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#12.5).

[^11]: This whole passage is unprecedented in early Buddhism. If
    Sunakkhatta was indeed able to revive the dead with three punches,
    it would explain why he thought so little of the Buddha's powers.
    But the ease with which this information is obtained contrasts with
    the elaborate failures of [Pāyāsi]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    23](https://suttacentral.net/dn23/en/sujato)).

[^12]: Spellings for [Kaḷāramaṭṭaka]{lang="sa"} vary greatly.

[^13]: In these practices we see some examples of the vows or
    observances (*vata*) that Buddha rejected as "grasping at precepts
    and observances"

[^14]: A diet of pure meat is still undertaken today by certain would-be
    gurus.

[^15]: Compare the "vow of restraint in the directions" in the Jain
    [Tattvārthasūtra]{lang="sa"} 7.1.

[^16]: *[Āsādimhase]{lang="sa"}* is middle aorist plural. Below
    Sunakkhatta again refers to himself in plural, but as usual I render
    with singular.

[^17]: The Burmese reading *[pāthikaputta]{lang="sa"}* means "son of a
    traveler". However the commentary says [Pāṭika]{lang="sa"} (or
    [Pāthika]{lang="sa"}) was the name of his father.

[^18]: For *[ñāṇavādo]{lang="sa"}* ("one who speaks from knowledge") see
    [AN 9.38:3.3](https://suttacentral.net/an9.38/en/sujato#3.3), [AN
    10.24:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.24/en/sujato#2.1), [MN
    26:15.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#15.7).

[^19]: "Ambiguous" is *[dvayagāminī]{lang="sa"}*, literally "two-going".

[^20]: *[Apadāna]{lang="sa"}* means "what has been left over, leavings,
    traces".

[^21]: This kind of elaborate display is commonly depicted in late
    texts, but is not otherwise found in early Pali.

[^22]: Compare [DN
    1:1.36.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.36.3). The
    following passage is largely adapted from the
    [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"}.

[^23]: Text has *[suññaṁ]{lang="sa"}*, but this appears to be a mistake,
    since the mansion is no longer "empty" as [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} is
    already there. Follow [DN
    1:2.4.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.4.3), which lacks
    *[suññaṁ]{lang="sa"}*.

[^24]: This statement is not explicitly phrased as a question, but the
    [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} edition inconsistently punctuates it as
    one. It makes more sense in context, especially as a response to the
    initial question: *[Kathaṁvihitakaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("How do you
    describe ...") ... *[Evaṁvihitakaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("Is this how you
    describe ...").

[^25]: This is adopted from [DN
    1:2.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.2.1). These
    philosophers belong with the "partial eternalists".

[^26]: [DN 1:2.7.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.7.2).

[^27]: [DN 1:2.10.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.10.2).

[^28]: [DN 1:2.31.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.31.1).

[^29]: The Buddha refers to the events of this sutta at [DN
    8:23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#23.2), but apart from
    that Nigrodha ("Banyan") appears to be unknown. A "wanderer" may or
    may not be Brahmanical, but in DN 8 Nigrodha is called
    *[tapabrahmacārī]{lang="sa"}*, which suggests he was a celibate
    student of a Brahmanical teacher. \| The commentary describes
    *[udumbarikā]{lang="sa"}* ("Fig") as *[devī]{lang="sa"}* ("Queen"),
    while DA 8 says she is a "brahmin lady". She too does not seem to
    appear elsewhere.

[^30]: [Sandhāna]{lang="sa"} ("Conciliation") was recognized as an
    eminent lay follower at ([AN
    6.120--139:1.14](https://suttacentral.net/an6.120-139/en/sujato#1.14)).

[^31]: "One-eyed cow" is *[gokāṇā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^32]: *[Orodheyyāma]{lang="sa"}* normally means "enclose, trap" like ox
    in a pen ([AN
    6.60:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an6.60/en/sujato#3.1)), but here
    it is glossed in the commentary as *[vinandheyyāma]{lang="sa"}*
    ("twist around").

[^33]: This discourse highlights the Buddha's method of engaging with
    people of other religions. He is open-hearted and interested in
    their views. He prefers to build on common ground, but is not afraid
    to criticize when it is warranted. And his aim is not to win
    converts, but to help people be free of suffering.

[^34]: "Higher disgust of sin" renders *adhijegucche*. The idea is that
    people are tainted with corruption, somewhat comparable to the
    notion of "original sin", although due to their own actions in the
    past rather than ancestral legacy. In "disgust" at that sin, they
    practice forms of fervent mortification (*tapas*) to burn out the
    corruption.

[^35]: The phrase *[kathaṁ]{lang="sa"} [santā]{lang="sa"}* is unique; it
    echoes *[evaṁ]{lang="sa"} sante* below.

[^36]: See the passage at [DN
    8:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#14.3) and notes
    thereto.

[^37]: The Buddha shifts attention from the external practice to the
    psychological state that accompanies it.

[^38]: "In expectation" (*[sāpekkho]{lang="sa"}*): when they give up
    something they cannot eat, they expect to be given more suitable
    food.

[^39]: "Sneaks" is *[attānaṁ]{lang="sa"} [adassayamāno]{lang="sa"}*,
    literally, "not showing himself". They like to hang about with lay
    folk, but hide the fact that they do so.

[^40]: As here, this item typically follows "wrong view". At [AN
    10.78:1.9](https://suttacentral.net/an10.78/en/sujato#1.9) it is
    said to be a bad quality of Jain ascetics. Thus being "attached to
    one's own views" refers both to the subjective clinging as well as
    the objective incorrectness of the views.

[^41]: A "fourfold restraint" (*[cātuyāma]{lang="sa"}*, or
    *[cāujjāma]{lang="sa"}* in Jain Ardhamagadhi) is attributed to Jain
    founder [Pārśva]{lang="sa"} in [Isibhāsiyāiṁ]{lang="sa"} 31, where
    it is an abbreviated list: "from refraining from killing to
    refraining from possessions"
    (*[pāṇātivāta]{lang="sa"}-[veramaṇeṇaṁ]{lang="sa"} [jāvā]{lang="sa"}
    pariggaha-[veramaṇeṇaṁ]{lang="sa"}*); the missing items are not
    stealing (*asteya*) and truth (*satya*). The Jain text
    [Uttarādhyayanasūtra]{lang="sa"} 23 shows that [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"}
    added nakedness to make five. Five are also found in
    [Yogasūtra]{lang="sa"} 2.30 and the Jain
    [Tattvārthasūtra]{lang="sa"} 7: non-harming (*[ahiṁsā]{lang="sa"}*),
    truth (*satya*), no stealing (*asteya*), celibacy (*brahmacarya*),
    and non-possessiveness (*[aparigrahā]{lang="sa"}*). \| A different
    "fourfold restraint" is said to be a Jain practice at [DN
    2:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#29.2).

[^42]: This extends the basic precept. The same analysis is applied to
    the "ten ways of performing deeds" at [AN
    3.163](https://suttacentral.net/an3.163/en/sujato). \| The
    distinction between one's own action and another's action is noted
    at [Isibhāsiyāiṁ]{lang="sa"} 31.42, although the wording and sense
    are different.

[^43]: *[Bhāvitamāsīsati]{lang="sa"}* is unique. In this and similar
    contexts, the Pali tradition says *[bhāvita]{lang="sa"}* ("reward",
    normally "developed") is the "five sense pleasures" as they see it
    (*[bhāvitaṁ]{lang="sa"} [nāma]{lang="sa"} [tesaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [saññāya]{lang="sa"} [pañca]{lang="sa"} [kāmaguṇā]{lang="sa"}*; cp.
    [MN 56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato) commentary: *ettha
    ca [bhāvitanti]{lang="sa"} [pañcakāmaguṇā]{lang="sa"}*), explaining
    that this is a usage of the sectarians ([Saddanīti]{lang="sa"} ch.
    4: *titthiyasamaye pana [bhāvitoti]{lang="sa"} [kāmaguṇo]{lang="sa"}
    vuccati*).

[^44]: This passage sets a powerful template for sincere engagement.

[^45]: This whole ending sequence is unique.

[^46]: *[Mātulā]{lang="sa"}* means "maternal uncle". This Magadhan
    village is mentioned only here and [Cp
    9:39.2](https://suttacentral.net/cp9/en/sujato#39.2).

[^47]: As at [DN
    16:2.26.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#2.26.1).

[^48]: Two parables on mindfulness expand this idea ([SN
    47.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.6/en/sujato), [SN
    46.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.7/en/sujato)).

[^49]: *[Evamidaṁ]{lang="sa"}* indicates entailment, as at [SN
    56.21:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.21/en/sujato#1.3), [MN
    73:13.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn73/en/sujato#13.2), [DN
    16:4.2.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.2.4).

[^50]: We have heard the story of the wheel-turning monarch
    [Mahāsudassana]{lang="sa"} in [DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato). [Daḷhanemi]{lang="sa"}
    appears only here. His name means "Strong-rim", such being one of
    the characteristics of the Wheel. His story of renunciation shares
    much in common with that of Maghadeva ([MN
    83](https://suttacentral.net/mn83/en/sujato)).

[^51]: "Receded back" (*[osakkitaṁ]{lang="sa"}*): like a woman shrinking
    away from a man's unwanted advances ([DN
    12:16.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn12/en/sujato#16.12)).

[^52]: The same point of view is expressed at [Bi Pc
    21:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bi-vb-pc21/en/sujato#1.4),
    where sex workers teased nuns, suggesting they enjoy themselves
    while young and ordain when old. The Buddhist position is that
    Dhamma can be practiced at any age.

[^53]: The signs of the renunciate predate Buddhism.

[^54]: "Inherited from your father" (*[pettikaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [dāyajjaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) calls back to the four
    *[satipaṭṭhānas]{lang="sa"}* that for a mendicant are "the domain of
    your fathers" (*pettike visaye*). In both cases they are to be
    earned, not conferred by lineage.

[^55]: "The noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch" (*ariye
    cakkavattivatte*; this is locative singular). *Ariya* ("noble")
    qualifies "duty" (*vatta*), as it does in the title below,
    *cakkavattiariyavatta*, rather than "monarch". Normally *ariya* is
    reserved for those who have attained the Buddhist path, but here we
    might have a rare use of *ariya* in reference to Indo-Aryan (Vedic)
    culture. Compare the use of *ariyaka* for speakers of Indo-Aryan
    languages at [Bu Pj
    1:8.4.10](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#8.4.10).
    However, the commentary says it simply means "flawless" (*niddoso*).

[^56]: *[Saṁvidahassu]{lang="sa"}* is second middle imperative.

[^57]: *Pavattittha* is aorist middle. *(A)[dhammakāra]{lang="sa"}*
    ("(in)justice") doesn't seem to occur elsewhere in early Pali. It is
    found in Ja 513 and Ja 498, both times in the context of just rule.

[^58]: "Provide" (*anuppadeti*) is used elsewhere in the sense of paying
    back a loan ([AN
    3.20:3.5](https://suttacentral.net/an3.20/en/sujato#3.5)), serving
    honored guests ([SN
    7.2:2.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn7.2/en/sujato#2.6)), paying
    wages ([DN 31:32.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn31/en/sujato#32.2)),
    or a king supplying provisions for essential workers to do their job
    ([DN 5:11.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#11.8)). It is
    thus more about fulfilling a moral obligation of fairness than
    offering charity.

[^59]: Where the phrase "from time to time go to them" (*te
    [kālena]{lang="sa"} [kālaṁ]{lang="sa"} [upasaṅkamitvā]{lang="sa"}*)
    occurs elsewhere in the suttas, it is always followed by "ask and
    question" (*paripucchati [paripañhati]{lang="sa"}*). Here, however,
    the second verb is "you should learn"
    (*[pariggaṇheyyāsi]{lang="sa"}*).

[^60]: "Own ideas" is *sa-mata*.

[^61]: *Pabbanti* is unusual and probably unique in early Pali. It is
    related to Sanskrit *parvati* ("fill") and is explained by the
    commentary as *[vaḍḍhanti]{lang="sa"}* ("grow, prosper"). \| I
    assume *[janapadā]{lang="sa"}* ("countries") is a misspelling of
    *[jānapadā]{lang="sa"}* ("people of the country"), as *janapada* is
    otherwise in singular.

[^62]: "Military officers" (*[anīkaṭṭhā]{lang="sa"}*) would have been
    standing officers in the army. According to both the commentary here
    and Monier-Williams' Sanskrit Dictionary (*[anīkastha]{lang="sa"}*),
    it includes elephant officers, who would have stood at the head of
    the army. \| "Professional advisers" (*[mantassājīvino]{lang="sa"}*)
    is explained by the commentary as those who make a living from
    giving wise advice.

[^63]: Ensuring citizens have enough to live on is not merely a matter
    of kindness and common decency, but is crucial to ensure stability
    and national unity.

[^64]: The origins of theft are told at [DN
    27:19.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#19.1). The myth
    recounted here overlaps, with points of both similarity and
    difference.

[^65]: The king uses the same procedure as the Buddha. When presented
    with an alleged wrong-doer, the first thing is to ask them whether
    they did it.

[^66]: Simply providing money is not enough, nor is simply expecting
    that people can just work for what they want. They need something to
    get started, together with the support and opportunity to build a
    life for themselves.

[^67]: Sadly, bad faith actors take advantage of kindness.

[^68]: While the king's concern is legitimate, his overreaction
    escalates the problems.

[^69]: The violence of the state leads to an armed and violent
    citizenry.

[^70]: Today we can see that, even among developed nations, a degraded
    and violent culture leads to declining lifespans.

[^71]: *[Paresaṁ]{lang="sa"} [dāresu]{lang="sa"}*: both "others" and
    "wives" are in plural, so polygyny is assumed. Compare *parassa
    [dāresu]{lang="sa"}* ("the wives of another") at [SN
    55.7:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.7/en/sujato#6.3). Note the
    significance granted to beauty in influencing human society.

[^72]: At this point, the three factors of wrong action---killing,
    stealing, and sexual misconduct---are present, as are the four
    factors of wrong speech---lying, backbiting, harsh speech, and
    nonsensical speech.

[^73]: This completes the three factors of unskillful thought: desire,
    ill will, and wrong views (which are a strong form of delusion).
    Here wrong view probably means moral nihilism.

[^74]: These three terms recur in a similar context at [AN
    3.56:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56/en/sujato#2.1). The
    commentaries to the two passages give quite different explanations.
    \| "Illicit desire" (*[adhammarāgo]{lang="sa"}*) probably refers to
    any form of desire that is illegal or transgressive, such as incest,
    rape, or pedophilia. \| "Immoral greed" (*visamalobho*) implies
    excess and imbalance. Both are, however, explained in the commentary
    to [AN 3.56:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56/en/sujato#2.1) as
    desire for the belongings of others. \| *[Micchādhammo]{lang="sa"}*
    is hard to pin down. Its opposite, *[sammā]{lang="sa"} dhammo*
    always means "right teaching". The commentary here explains it as
    "men with men and women with women", but this must be rejected as
    there is no hint anywhere in early Pali (or elsewhere in early
    Indian culture) that homosexual relations were considered immoral.
    The commentary to [AN
    3.56:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56/en/sujato#2.1) explains it
    as "indulgence in what is reckoned an inappropriate basis"
    (*[avatthupaṭisevanasaṅkhātena]{lang="sa"}*). This implies
    intercourse with one of the women mentioned at [MN
    41:8.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn41/en/sujato#8.4), which includes
    those who are "protected by principle"
    (*[dhammarakkhitā]{lang="sa"}*). This sense of *dhamma* is explained
    at [Bu Ss
    5:4.2.16](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss5/en/sujato#4.2.16)
    as "religion". Here I think the sense is similar: customs or beliefs
    that legitimize immorality.

[^75]: This brings us to the Buddha's present.

[^76]: Here the Buddha paints a devastating picture of societal
    collapse. Life expectancy as low as thirty years has been recorded
    in some countries in the 20th century.

[^77]: The age of onset of puberty has been dropping globally over the
    past century, with isolated cases as young as five.

[^78]: "Finger millet" (*[kudrūsaka]{lang="sa"}*; Pahari *kodra*,
    Garhwal *koda*) is a robust secondary grain in Asia and Africa,
    growing in places rice cannot. Due to its resilience in the face of
    global heating, 2023 was declared the International Year of Millets
    by the UN.

[^79]: The Buddha's father gave this luxury food to servants and staff
    ([AN 3.39:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.39/en/sujato#2.3)).

[^80]: The narrative above traced the gradual disappearance of these ten
    factors. \| *[Atibyādippissanti]{lang="sa"}* is a unique term. At
    [AN 7.66:9.2](https://suttacentral.net/an7.66/en/sujato#9.2) a sign
    of the end of days is the "erupting" (*[ādippanti]{lang="sa"}*) of
    volcanoes, suggesting "explode" for the intensive form here.

[^81]: "Skillful" is *kusala*, otherwise translated as "good" or
    "wholesome".

[^82]: At [AN 2.9](https://suttacentral.net/an2.9/en/sujato) = [Iti
    42](https://suttacentral.net/iti42/en/sujato) the world is protected
    from this by conscience and prudence.

[^83]: For *sambheda* in the sense of "dissolving, leaking", see [DN
    3:1.15.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.15.11), [AN
    5.103:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an5.103/en/sujato#6.4), [AN
    10.45:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.45/en/sujato#4.1). The
    commentary here says "mixedness, breaking of boundaries".

[^84]: "Interregnum of swords" is *satthantarakappo*. Seven days seems
    optimistic.

[^85]: Dehumanization of the other is an essential precursor to
    genocide.

[^86]: "Let us neither kill nor be killed" (*[mā]{lang="sa"} ca
    [mayaṁ]{lang="sa"} [kañci]{lang="sa"}, [mā]{lang="sa"} ca amhe
    koci*) is an idiomatic phrase, the Golden Rule framed as a negative:
    "Let us not do unto others nor let others do unto us." It is
    explained by the commentary as, "Let us not take even a single
    person's life or let them take ours".

[^87]: *[Sabhāgāyissanti]{lang="sa"}* = *[sabhāga]{lang="sa"}* +
    *[āyissanti]{lang="sa"}* = "will come together". \|
    *[Samassāsissanti]{lang="sa"}* = *sama* + *[sāsati]{lang="sa"}* =
    "cry in one voice". The latter term is absent from some manuscripts.

[^88]: *[Diṭṭhā]{lang="sa"}* is Sanskrit *[diṣṭyā]{lang="sa"}*,
    "fantastic, how fortunate", per [DN
    16:2.24.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#2.24.5) and [Ja
    81:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ja81/en/sujato#1.4). \|
    *[Sattā]{lang="sa"}* is nominative singular for *sattar* ("enemy"),
    not plural of *satta* ("being"), which disagrees with both verb and
    vocative in number.

[^89]: The first precept, and the first of the ten ways of skillful
    action. The Buddhist ethical principles are not just a part of
    Buddhist teaching, they are essential for the healthy functioning of
    human society.

[^90]: In the legendary past, too, only these three afflictions
    prevailed ([Snp
    2.7:29.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato#29.1)).

[^91]: [Ketumatī]{lang="sa"} means "adorned with flags".

[^92]: [Saṅkha]{lang="sa"} is "conch shell".

[^93]: This is the only sutta appearance of the future Buddha Metteyya
    (Sanskrit Maitreya, meaning "one full of love"). He became a
    prominent figure in later Buddhism.

[^94]: Throughout, the Buddha is concerned to emphasize that the future
    Buddha will offer no more or less than his own teaching and
    practice. He wanted people to practice now, not to establish a cult
    of a future savior.

[^95]: The maximum number of monastics cited in the suttas is 1250 at a
    single gathering.

[^96]: This event is found in Bhaddaji's verses at [Thag
    2.22](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.22/en/sujato), expanded to a
    full story at Ja 264. The commentary explains *[yūpa]{lang="sa"}* as
    "palace", but Bhaddaji's verses clearly depict a sacrificial post,
    to which the animal would be tied for slaughter. Such posts are
    connected with the horse sacrifice, which establishes imperial
    power. This is but one aspect of the wheel-turning monarch to draw
    on imagery from the horse sacrifice. Here, of course, no horses are
    killed.

[^97]: *[Ajjhāvasati]{lang="sa"}* in this sutta means "reign" not
    "dwell" ([DN 26:2.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#2.5)).

[^98]: This sutta is the closest we come to a Buddhist myth of origins.
    It draws on features of Vedic mythology, while giving its own spin.
    Related stories may be found in [DN
    26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato) and [Snp
    2.7](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato). The Buddha
    describes a natural process of evolution that requires no
    metaphysical intervention, yet differs strikingly from Darwinian
    evolution in prioritizing the role of desire over selection.

[^99]: After the Jetavana, this was the best-known monastery in
    [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}. It was offered by the lady
    [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, known as [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother.

[^100]: We met [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} as the
    students of [Pokkharasāti]{lang="sa"} and [Tārukkha]{lang="sa"}
    respectively in [DN 13](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato), at
    the end of which they went for refuge. Some time later they must
    have asked for ordination. The commentary says that probation
    (*paravasati*) was required, not because they had previously gone
    forth in other sects (as the naked ascetic Kassapa at [DN
    8:24.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#24.1) or the wanderer
    Subhadda at [DN
    16:5.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.29.1)), nor
    because they had committed an offence, but because they were not yet
    the required twenty years of age.

[^101]: Here as in [DN 13](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato)
    [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} takes the lead.

[^102]: This verse is also at [MN
    84:9.19](https://suttacentral.net/mn84/en/sujato#9.19) and [MN
    93:5.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#5.4). \| For "best
    class" (*[seṭṭho]{lang="sa"} [vaṇṇo]{lang="sa"}*) see
    *[varṇaśreṣṭhaḥ]{lang="sa"}* at [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"} 1.24.4c.

[^103]: [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"} 12.181.5 says that brahmins are the
    white class, aristocrats red, peasants yellow, and menials black.
    Underlying this is an assumption of the superiority of the
    fair-skinned northerners of Indo-Aryan descent over the dark-skinned
    natives (see [DN
    3:1.10.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.10.3)).

[^104]: I cannot trace this statement to Brahmanical texts, and indeed
    they have a strong tendency to push back against the idea that only
    brahmins can find purity.

[^105]: An allusion to the famous [Puruṣasūkta]{lang="sa"} (Rig Veda
    10.90.12): "His (the cosmic Man's) mouth became the brahmin, his
    arms became the ruler (*[rājanya]{lang="sa"}*, an alternate name for
    the *khattiyas*), his thighs became the peasant
    (*[vaiśya]{lang="sa"}*); the menial (*[sūdra]{lang="sa"}*) was born
    from his feet." This belongs to the latest portion of the Rig Veda,
    and probably represents a time when the system of four castes was
    established in the late Vedic period, some centuries before the
    Buddha. Apart from this, the Rig Veda hardly mentions any of these
    as castes, let alone all four together.

[^106]: The Buddha gives a rationalist critique of Vedic myth (see also
    [MN 93:5.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#5.9)), the
    fairness of which is not easy to assess. Within the Brahmanical
    world, especially the progressive Kosalan brahmins to whom
    [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} belonged, there
    had been a shift towards a more nuanced symbolic understanding of
    such claims. Yet the subtle distinctions of the philosophers rarely
    influence the more straightforward beliefs of the common
    practitioner.

[^107]: "Dark" (*[kaṇha]{lang="sa"}*) and "bright" (or "light", *sukka*)
    are redefined in ethical not racial terms.

[^108]: Vedic theory claimed that the caste system was part of the order
    of nature (*dhamma*) established by [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}, and hence
    to follow the obligations of caste was a duty (also *dhamma*). The
    Buddha posited a higher "principle" (*dhamma*) beyond caste. The
    English word "principle" carries the senses of a fundamental law; a
    code of conduct; a devotion to right living; a source; and an
    underlying faculty, all of which are aspects of *dhamma* in this
    passage.

[^109]: A great king such as Pasenadi ruled his central realm, while
    outlying districts pledged allegiance to him, enjoying royal
    protection while ceding some sovereignty. It is the same
    relationship described for the kingdoms subsumed under the
    Wheel-Turning Monarch (eg. [DN
    17:1.9.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.9.5)). The
    Buddha described his people as natives among the Kosalans at [Snp
    3.1:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.1/en/sujato#18.4).

[^110]: The [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading *na [naṁ]{lang="sa"}*
    yields a better sense than the PTS *nanu*, which would make this a
    question.

[^111]: [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} was said to be a high family, while
    [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} was low ([Bu Pc
    2:2.1.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc2/en/sujato#2.1.18)).

[^112]: The Buddha adapts the Brahmanical rhetoric of birth from the
    "mouth of [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}". Having criticized them for taking
    this literally he employs it in a metaphorical sense.

[^113]: "The embodiment of principle" is *[dhammakāya]{lang="sa"}*. This
    is a term of unique occurrence in the suttas, which was seized on in
    later days to posit a metaphysical theory of a quasi-eternal Buddha.
    In the suttas, it means that he, having practiced the Dhamma to its
    fullest, embodies the qualities of the Dhamma to the highest degree.

[^114]: Here begins the story of origins. The Buddha begins his creation
    myth with the end of the world. For this passage, compare [DN
    1:2.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.2.1).

[^115]: In the [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"}, beings pass from one
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm to another, but when they come to this
    world it is as a human. Here we have a different perspective, where
    beings apparently still like the [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} gods exist in
    the physical realm.

[^116]: The role of food is critical throughout this narrative. Food is
    a fundamental sustenance on which all creatures must rely, and the
    nature of the food reflects the type of creature that eats it.
    [Taittirīya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 2.5.1 says the highest
    form of self is made of bliss (*[ātmā]{lang="sa"}
    [ānandamaya]{lang="sa"}*).

[^117]: Creation myths often begin with a dark, formless world of water,
    and describe the emergence of divisions and structures of the world.
    They do not differentiate the physical, biological, ecological, or
    social, as such distinctions came later.

[^118]: Throughout, the discourse has a special interest in tracing the
    origins of language and how different usages came about. Here the
    term "beings" is presented as a natural choice: they are "beings"
    because they are alive. Later, words are selected to convey a
    certain political or moral stance.

[^119]: The reading and sense of *samatani* is obscure. I think it is
    connected with *[santānaka]{lang="sa"}* in the next line, in the
    sense of "networks" or tendrils appearing in the water as it
    curdles. The Sanskrit at SF 277 and [Mūlasarvāstvāda]{lang="sa"}
    Vinaya 17 has *[saṁmūrcchitaḥ]{lang="sa"} [saṁtanoti]{lang="sa"}*
    ("curdled tendrils"). \| *[Rasapathavī]{lang="sa"}* ("earth's
    nectar") is also obscure. We would expect *[pathavīrasa]{lang="sa"}*
    (cp. *phalarasa* "fruit juice", etc.), which is indeed found at [SN
    5.9:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn5.9/en/sujato#5.3) in the sense
    "nutriments in soil". Since this reading also appears here in the
    Sanskrit sources, I assume it is the correct sense. For another
    example of a *tappurisa* compound with reversed order, see [DN
    4:6.46](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#6.46).

[^120]: *[Khuddā]{lang="sa"}* (literally "small one") is said to be a
    species of small bee, also known in Sanskrit as
    *[kṣudrā]{lang="sa"}*. The "dwarf bee" (*apis florea*) fits the
    bill, as it is a small wild honeybee found in India.

[^121]: Ghee and honey were among the finest offerings to the gods. The
    soma was often described as "honeyed". Our text is suggesting that
    the Vedic sacrifices led to the corruption of divinity.

[^122]: For *acchadesi* read *[assādesi]{lang="sa"}* ("enjoyed") after
    Mu Kd 17's *[āsvādayati]{lang="sa"}*. The commentary explains
    *acchadesi* as "becomes suffused", so if it is a misreading it is an
    old one.

[^123]: At [DN 26:17.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#17.2) it
    is the ugly ones who are at fault for jealousy.

[^124]: This is another veiled critique of the Vedic tradition. In [DN
    13:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#13.1) the Buddha
    told [Vāseṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} the Vedas
    were recited by people who did not understand them. This problem was
    well understood within the tradition of the [Brāhmaṇas]{lang="sa"}
    and [Upaniṣads]{lang="sa"}, which constantly emphasized that they
    are effective for "one who knows this" (*ya evam veda*).

[^125]: "Fungus" is *[pappaṭaka]{lang="sa"}* (Sanskrit
    *[parpaṭaka]{lang="sa"}*). At [Bu Pj
    1:2.2.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#2.2.5),
    [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"} suggests that, to alleviate famine, the
    monks might eat the *[pappaṭakojaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("fungus-nutrition")
    under the earth. Given that it is compared to a mushroom, I think it
    is the fungal mycelia of a mycorrhizal network. Such fungi spread
    like tendrils underground, sometimes appearing above the surface,
    sharing nutrients and information between organisms.

[^126]: Readings and meaning of *[padālatā]{lang="sa"}* are uncertain.
    It has usually been understood that the second element is
    *[latā]{lang="sa"}* ("creeper"). But this leaves *[padā]{lang="sa"}*
    unexplained, and the commentary's gloss of *[bhaddālatā]{lang="sa"}*
    is unconvincing. It also leaves unexplained the connection with
    *[kalambukā]{lang="sa"}*. This is probably the fruit of the kadam
    tree---fleshy, yellow-orange capsules with about 8000 seeds that
    split apart when ripe. I think *[padālatā]{lang="sa"}* is related to
    *[padālana]{lang="sa"}* in the sense of "bursting": a seed pod that
    splits open like a fig or pomegranate.

[^127]: The commentary to [Bu Pj
    1:10.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#10.6.1)
    explains "male characteristics" as "beard and whiskers, etc."
    (*[massudāṭhikādi]{lang="sa"}*), so this is not just genitals but
    also secondary sex characteristics.

[^128]: Pali *[seṭṭhi]{lang="sa"}* is explained by the commentary as
    "ash" (*[chārikā]{lang="sa"}*), although this sense does not seem to
    be attested anywhere else. [Mahāvastu]{lang="sa"} has
    *[leṣṭu]{lang="sa"}* while Mu Kd 17 has *[loṣṭa]{lang="sa"}*, both
    explained as "clod". Given that it is easier to throw a clod than
    ash, I think these probably convey the correct sense.

[^129]: *Nassa* could mean "die!" or "get lost". I take the softer
    meaning, as killing has not yet appeared among these beings. \| This
    behavior looks much like scapegoating rituals, where certain members
    of the community are deemed to bear the sins of all and are
    sacrificed to erase the sin. Often the victim was expelled from the
    community, temporarily or permanently.

[^130]: Mob shaming over perceived sexual transgression is the most
    primitive form of moralizing.

[^131]: "Carrying off" (*[nibbuyhamānā]{lang="sa"}*) like being swept
    away by a river. Mu Kd 17 says they throw powder, scent, garlands,
    and nets, while wishing the bride happiness and well-being.

[^132]: "Unprincipled" is *adhamma*. In the past the lovers were
    spurned, now they are celebrated in marriage.

[^133]: The sight of others having sex provokes strong reactions of
    arousal, jealousy, and disgust, often leading to violence. A culture
    of sexual modesty regulates these emotions, promoting the growth of
    larger societal structures.

[^134]: Human society evolves first from greed, second from sexual
    desire, and third from laziness. The effort to avoid manual labor
    drives cultural and technological innovation.

[^135]: Humans are focused on short term comforts and ignore long term
    consequences.

[^136]: The wild grasses used as grains evolve in adaptation to human
    needs.

[^137]: The beings tell their story within the story. The oldest myths,
    such as the Vedas or Gilgamesh, speak of myths that were already
    ancient for them. And the oldest story of all is the Fall: the death
    of God, the recession of divinity, how things were better in the old
    days. The story is a reckoning with the consequences of their
    actions, yet it is not sufficient for them to change course.

[^138]: Scarcity has arisen because of greed, giving rise to agriculture
    and land ownership. Up until now, the changes have been driven by
    individual choice, whereas now they are starting to make agreements
    among themselves, hoping to mitigate the irresponsibility of
    individuals.

[^139]: With ownership and inequality come theft.

[^140]: It turns out that moral scolding does not deter wrong-doers.

[^141]: The mob violence escalates.

[^142]: All a direct consequence of thoughtless greed and inequality.

[^143]: "Accuse" is *[khīyeyya]{lang="sa"}*. Here the beings are taking
    charge of their social evolution, deciding among themselves how to
    manage their society. They are active agents in their own story, not
    merely passive subjects of evolution. And the primary decision they
    make is to form a democracy by election (*sammata*). Doing so, they
    create a two-class system: rulers and subjects.

[^144]: The origin of upper class, white-collar workers who do not have
    to till the soil. Taxes are not coerced, but voluntarily offered in
    recognition of services rendered.

[^145]: The emphasis on appearance reflects a wider acknowledgement of
    the potency of beauty in shaping human conduct. The Buddha rejected
    the notion that beauty indicates worth (eg. [SN
    21.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.6/en/sujato)), yet was himself
    regarded as especially beautiful. Unfair it may be, but beautiful
    people are listened to.

[^146]: The *ehi* formula echoes the original ordination method ([Kd
    1:6.32.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#6.32.3)).

[^147]: "Applied to them" (*[upanibbattaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) is unique. The
    Sanskrit texts have *[saṁjñodapādi]{lang="sa"}*, "arisen by
    agreement". It is distinct from [DN
    27:11.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#11.2) above, where
    beings "come to be called" beings (*[saṅkhyaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    gacchanti*). Clearly it cannot mean the first word that appeared. I
    take it to mean this was a specialized term invented and applied
    just for them. The commentary says, *na [kevalaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    akkharameva*, "not just a universal term".

[^148]: "Aristocrat" (*khattiya*; Sanskrit *[kṣatriya]{lang="sa"}*) is
    related to *khatta* ("authority", "power"; in eg. Rig Veda 8.25.8 it
    is an adjective, "powerful"), hence "ruling class". The sutta,
    however, relates it to *khetta*, "field". The two senses possibly
    stem from the same root *[kṣi]{lang="sa"}* in the sense "owner",
    "master" with the "field" being the dominion owned by the chief. In
    Pali suttas, the primary connotation of the *khattiya* was of an
    aristocratic land-owning class, so the connection with "field" is
    apt. *Khattiyas* are often said to be a "warrior" caste, but that is
    not a primary association in the suttas. They are rarely depicted as
    having anything to do with the military, which had become
    professionalized by the time of the Buddha. Nonetheless, at [MN
    96:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.7) a
    *khattiya's* wealth is said to be the bow and arrow. At [SN
    3.24](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.24/en/sujato), the Buddha argues
    that someone from any caste could be as proficient a warrior as
    someone from the *khattiya* class.

[^149]: Modern linguists trace the Proto-Indo-European root of
    *[rāja]{lang="sa"}* as *\*reg* in the sense "one who leads people in
    a straight line", literally "ruler" or "regulator". The pun
    *[rañjeti]{lang="sa"}* ("they please") is meant to emphasize the
    obligations that a ruler has for their people. As here,
    *[rājā]{lang="sa"}* and *khattiya* can have the same meaning,
    although commonly a *[rājā]{lang="sa"}* is an actual king or chief,
    while *khattiya* is the class from which the rulers come.

[^150]: Read *[bāheyyāma]{lang="sa"}*.

[^151]: *[Bāhenti]{lang="sa"}* ("set aside") sounds a bit like
    *[brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}*. Such puns which don't quite land are
    sometimes used to infer a language underlying Pali.
    *[Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}* is a Sanskrit form, and the colloquial
    pronunciation may have been closer to *[bāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"}*.

[^152]: The phrase *[jhāyanti]{lang="sa"} [vītaṅgārā]{lang="sa"}
    [vītadhūmā]{lang="sa"} [pannamusalā]{lang="sa"}* works at a double
    level. *[Jhāyanti]{lang="sa"}* is to "meditate" but also is the
    light of a lamp. *[Vītaṅgārā]{lang="sa"} [vītadhūmā]{lang="sa"}*
    means "without coals and smoke", implying that they do not light
    cooking fires; but as meditation it means their minds are free of
    corruptions. *[Pannamusalā]{lang="sa"}* is "with shovel put down",
    i.e. they do not dig the soil (thus killing the creatures there).
    Not cooking or digging are also precepts for Buddhist and Jain
    mendicants.

[^153]: "Meditator" is *[jhāyaka]{lang="sa"}*.

[^154]: At [DN 3:2.3.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#2.3.11)
    the brahmins come down from the forest and set up shrines in the
    town. [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 5.10.1--5
    compares the forest contemplatives destined for the
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm with the ritualists who are reborn on the
    moon before returning to earth. \| The "texts" (*ganthe*) were the
    Vedas.

[^155]: *[Ajjhāyaka]{lang="sa"}* is from *[ajjhāyati]{lang="sa"}* ("to
    recite"), but here it is punned as the negative of
    *[jhāyaka]{lang="sa"}* ("meditator").

[^156]: "Various" is *visu*, which loosely echoes *vessa* ("peasant").
    The Sanskrit form is *[vaiśya]{lang="sa"}*, from *[viś]{lang="sa"}*,
    to "stay" or "settle" on the land. They were probably originally
    peasants who over time transitioned into more diverse livelihoods.
    In [MN 96:10.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.10) they
    are said to engage in cattle-rearing and agriculture, and over time
    trade was added to that.

[^157]: *Sudda* ("menial") rhymes with *ludda* ("hunter") and *khudda*
    ("minor"). In [MN
    96:10.14](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.14) their
    wealth is said to come from the "scythe and flail", i.e. seasonal
    manual labor such as threshing grain ([SN
    35.248:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.248/en/sujato#1.2)). At
    [MN 96:16.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#16.4),
    bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, and waste-collectors are cited as
    other low-class jobs. They may have originated as a distinct branch
    of Aryan peoples who were assimilated into Vedic culture (Ram Sharan
    Sharma, *Śudras in Ancient India*, 37).

[^158]: "Vocation" is *dhamma*, which is rarely used in the suttas in
    this sense; normally it is universal.

[^159]: The Buddha invokes [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} to support his contention
    that his own caste, the *khattiyas*, were superior, a sequence
    supported by [Pañcaviṁśa]{lang="sa"} [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 13.4.7.
    Ultimately, however, the Buddha rejected the notion that caste tells
    us anything intrinsic about the worth of people.

[^160]: This discourse is expanded from the events of [DN
    16:1.16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#1.16.1).

[^161]: Here the additional material begins. While they are all said to
    be teachings of the Buddha, some sections cannot be traced in the
    Pali Canon as it stands today. Perhaps [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} was
    demonstrating his talent for creative rephrasing and synthesis.

[^162]: Perhaps a reference to his enlightenment experience in [MN
    74](https://suttacentral.net/mn74/en/sujato).

[^163]: Also at [DN
    16:3.50.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.50.5), etc.

[^164]: The primary source is the SN 35, the Linked Discourses on the
    Six Sense Fields.

[^165]: The Bodhisatta is said elsewhere to be conceived in awareness
    (eg. [DN
    16:3.15.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.15.1)), but
    this systematic analysis is found only here and at [DN
    33:1.11.176](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.11.176). It
    seems like an abrupt shift from central Dhamma topics.

[^166]: Called "demonstrations of revealing"
    (*[ādesanāpāṭihāriya]{lang="sa"}*) at [AN
    3.60:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.60/en/sujato#9.1).

[^167]: Meditation is described in this way only in [MN
    136:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn136/en/sujato#9.1) and [DN
    1:1.31.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.31.1) where, as
    here, it is pursued by an "ascetic or brahmin", who in those cases
    is not Buddhist. Here, however, it sounds like
    [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is talking about a Buddhist practice. The
    *asubha* contemplation of the parts of the body is described in
    several places in the canon (eg. [DN
    22:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#5.1)), but never
    exactly like this.

[^168]: The remaining practices are unique to this passage. This is
    perhaps related to the contemplation of death, as it seems to imply
    looking at another person's body rather than one's own.

[^169]: This is a unique description of the process of rebirth.
    Consciousness is a "stream" in that it flows and moves,
    ever-changing, and is not a static self-same entity. To be
    "established" (*[patiṭṭhita]{lang="sa"}*) is to be attached because
    of craving. \| The phrase "consistent on both sides" (*ubhayato
    [abbocchinnaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) is unique. *Ubhayato* is used of "both
    ends" of a pole [Ja
    533:37.4](https://suttacentral.net/ja533/en/sujato#37.4). I think
    the sense is that one's consciousness is consistent with regards to
    this world and the next. If one is attached to this world, one will
    be attached to the next, and vice versa in the next section.

[^170]: As at [AN
    7.14:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an7.14/en/sujato#1.3).

[^171]: Normally we would expect the four kinds of right striving here.
    This is the only place the seven awakening factors are described in
    this way.

[^172]: As at [AN 4.166](https://suttacentral.net/an4.166/en/sujato).

[^173]: These descriptions are unique. \| *[Vebhūtiya]{lang="sa"}* is
    only used here and DN 30, where the context shows it is a synonym
    for *[pesuṇiya]{lang="sa"}*.

[^174]: The [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} omits a heading for this section.

[^175]: The sequence from "memory" (*[satimā]{lang="sa"}*) to
    "retention" (*[dhitimā]{lang="sa"}*) is related to the good
    qualities of Ānanda ([AN
    1.220:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an1.220/en/sujato#1.1)), and
    pertain to textual fluency. *[Satimā]{lang="sa"}* here is "memory",
    not "mindfulness", which is *sato* at the end.

[^176]: We don't find this exact passage elsewhere, but it is similar to
    [AN 10.46](https://suttacentral.net/an10.46/en/sujato). When the
    Buddha speaks of future consequences it is conditional. He is not a
    fortune-teller, but he understands the results of the practice.

[^177]: *[Paccattaṁ]{lang="sa"} [yonisomanasikārā]{lang="sa"}* occurs at
    [SN 46.8:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.8/en/sujato#2.1) and [MN
    50:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#3.1), where it means
    "investigate inside oneself". Here it is applied to another.

[^178]: Another unique passage, similar to [MN
    68:12.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn68/en/sujato#12.4).

[^179]: Compare the four kinds of eternalism at [DN
    1:3.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#3.1.1). The theories
    based on rationality are omitted.

[^180]: According to the PTS edition, the Sinhala-script manuscripts
    read *na [jānāmi]{lang="sa"}* ("don"t know") against the
    [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} *[jānāmi]{lang="sa"}*. \| The means of
    knowledge given here is solely based on the recollection of past
    lives, which agrees with the [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"} that these
    are views based on the past. It seems the sectarian here is
    admitting the limits of their experiential knowledge, but
    nonetheless inferring eternalism in both past and future.

[^181]: Some manuscripts read "twenty" here.

[^182]: "Accompanied by defilements and attachments"
    (*[sāsavā]{lang="sa"} [saupadhikā]{lang="sa"}*) is unique, but
    compare *[sāsavā]{lang="sa"} [puññabhāgiyā]{lang="sa"}
    [upadhivepakkā]{lang="sa"}* at [MN
    117:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn117/en/sujato#6.3) and
    *[sāsavaṁ]{lang="sa"} [upādāniyaṁ]{lang="sa"}* at [SN
    22.48:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.48/en/sujato#2.2).

[^183]: Also at [MN
    152:11--15.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn152/en/sujato#11-15.3), [AN
    5.144:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an5.144/en/sujato#2.2), [SN
    52.1:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.1/en/sujato#4.2), [SN
    46.54:12.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.54/en/sujato#12.5), [SN
    54.8:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn54.8/en/sujato#7.1).

[^184]: From the first sermon at [SN
    56.11:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#2.3).

[^185]: Here the [jhānas]{lang="sa"} stand in the place of the path as a
    whole. In [DN 29:24.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#24.5)
    the Buddha uses a similar framing.

[^186]: Here *abhi-* in *[abbhanujānāti]{lang="sa"}* conveys the sense
    "grant in respect of one".

[^187]: Here [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is quoting the Buddha, yet this
    phrase is not found in the Pali Canon.

[^188]: At [MN 115:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn115/en/sujato#14.1).

[^189]: There are several individuals called [Udāyī]{lang="sa"}.

[^190]: The [Vedhaññās]{lang="sa"} are not mentioned elsewhere; their
    name means "Marksmen".

[^191]: When this event is mentioned at [MN
    104:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#2.1), the Buddha
    is also in the Sakyan lands, but near the village of
    [Sāma]{lang="sa"}. Both texts tell the story of Cunda conveying the
    news via Ānanda at [Sāma]{lang="sa"}, which was presumably near the
    [Vedhaññā]{lang="sa"}'s mango grove. It does seem strange that two
    distinct discourses are recorded from the same prompt, but then, why
    shouldn't the Buddha give more than one teaching on such an
    important topic? At [DN
    33:1.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.6.1) the Buddha
    is at [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} in the Mallian lands, and the discourse is
    spoken by [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} there. Given the evident lateness
    of DN 33, this is a less convincing framework. A parallel to MN 104
    (MA 196 at T i 752c12) says he was in the Vajjian lands at the time;
    both Sakya and Vajji border on [Mallā]{lang="sa"}. Jain tradition
    holds [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"} died after the Buddha, and it was at a
    different [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} in Magadha near [Nāḷandā]{lang="sa"},
    perhaps the place known in Pali as [Pāvārika]{lang="sa"}'s mango
    grove ([DN 11:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn11/en/sujato#1.2)).
    The earliest Jain source for [Mahāvīra]{lang="sa"}'s death, the
    Kalpasutra, is, however, much later than the Buddhist sources, and
    does not say where [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} is. But it does say the events
    were commemorated by the rulers of [Kāsī]{lang="sa"} and Kosala, and
    the Mallians and the [Licchavīs]{lang="sa"}. The absence of Magadha
    and the presence of Malla sit better with the location of
    [Pāvā]{lang="sa"} in Malla rather than Magadha.

[^192]: While this description of the Jains might seem like sheer
    sectarian calumny, it is a fact that the Jain tradition is split
    into two sects, the "sky-clad" Digambara, whose male ascetics went
    naked, and the "white-clad" [Śvetāmbara]{lang="sa"} who wear an
    unstitched cloth. Jain tradition holds that the split occurred about
    a century later, in the reign of Candragupta Maurya.

[^193]: A slight on the movement whose signature virtue was
    non-violence.

[^194]: "With broken monument" (*bhinnathupe*) is used only in this
    context. When a great teacher or leader died, a "monument" was built
    to keep their memory alive. The breaking of a monument---whether
    physical or symbolic---was, in a way, truly killing them.

[^195]: Cunda took the time to complete his rains residence before
    conveying the news, reminding us of the speed with which news
    traveled in those days---slowly. \| Apart from the events described
    here, we hear of [Sāma]{lang="sa"} only once ([AN
    6.21](https://suttacentral.net/an6.21/en/sujato)). The topic there
    is the decline of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, hinting at a connection
    with these events.

[^196]: This harsh critique is repeated at [DN
    33:1.7.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.7.4), but not at
    [MN 104:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#5.1), where
    the Buddha's response focuses on his own community.

[^197]: Normally we find *vokkamma* ("having turned away") in the sense
    of straying from the Dhamma. But this passage shows the phrase is,
    in itself, neutral, as it is good to turn from a bad teaching.

[^198]: The Dhamma is primary, not the teacher. This is applied to
    Buddhism as well; for example, a student is expected to help a
    mentor who is falling away from Dhamma ([Kd
    1:25.20.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#25.20.1)).

[^199]: Compare [AN 1.320](https://suttacentral.net/an1.320/en/sujato).

[^200]: "Collected sayings" is *[saṅgāhapada]{lang="sa"}*. This is a
    unique term, but the sense seems to be that the process of gathering
    and organizing teachings is incomplete. I take the negative *na* to
    be distributed separately among the clauses.

[^201]: Compare [DN
    16:3.8.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.8.4)ff.

[^202]: One of the Brahmanical sages under whom the Bodhisatta practiced
    before awakening ([MN
    26:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#16.1)). Another of
    his enigmatic sayings is found at [SN
    35.103:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.103/en/sujato#1.2). When
    the Bodhisatta began his study, he first learned to recite the
    scriptures, and in these two passages we find examples of what those
    scriptures were.

[^203]: Sharp razors were known even in Vedic times (Rig Veda 8.4.16).

[^204]: This is a distorted reference to [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"}
    [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 1.4.7. There, the Self is said to be hidden in
    a body like a razor in its case. People do not see it
    (*[taṁ]{lang="sa"} na [paśyanti]{lang="sa"}*), for they only see the
    partial and incomplete functions of the Self, such as breathing,
    speaking, and so on. Seeing only the aspects, they do not see that
    each aspect is an expression of the one whole. This confirms that
    Uddaka was a Brahmanical teacher who was familiar with this passage.
    Similar phrases, but without the razor simile, are found at
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.3.23 and
    [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 6.12.1.

[^205]: "Recite in concert" is *[saṅgīti]{lang="sa"}*. Reciting together
    affirms the mutual teaching and ensures the correctness of the text.
    The implication is that the entire Buddhist community participates,
    but in the *[saṅgīti]{lang="sa"}* after the Buddha's death there
    were only monks.

[^206]: Here the Buddha outlines the topics to be recited, which are the
    main chapters of the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}.

[^207]: The "meaning" is the *attha*. Here we see the source of the
    *[atthakathā]{lang="sa"}*, which we translate as "commentaries", but
    which are literally "discussions on the meaning". Such discussions
    are undertaken through a civil and polite inquiry.

[^208]: Meaning and phrasing are interdependent, so care must be taken
    with both. Often it happens that when the phrasing slips, a new and
    unwarranted meaning is imputed.

[^209]: These are the four basic requisites for monastics, said to
    overcome defilements by usage ([AN
    6.58:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an6.58/en/sujato#4.1), [MN
    2:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn2/en/sujato#13.1)).

[^210]: This repurposes the phrase used right at the beginning of the
    Buddha's first teaching, the Dhammacakkappavattasutta ([SN
    56.11:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#2.3)). There
    he was persuading hard-bitten ascetics that he did not indulge in
    sensual pleasures. While the affiliation of those five ascetics is
    not stated explicitly, clearly their practices were similar to the
    Jains. And given the context, no doubt the Buddha has the Jains in
    mind here.

[^211]: Again echoing the first sermon ([SN
    56.11:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#3.1)), here
    the Buddha places the *[jhānas]{lang="sa"}* where, in the
    Dhammacakkappavattasutta, he put the middle way. He uses a similar
    strategy at [DN
    28:19.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato#19.2).

[^212]: Some meditation teachers warn of the supposed dangers of
    becoming attached to the pleasure of meditation. The Buddha's view
    was that the pleasure of meditation arises from letting go and leads
    to Nibbana.

[^213]: At [AN 8.19:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.19/en/sujato#3.1)
    the ocean is said to be *[ṭhitadhammo]{lang="sa"}*, "naturally
    stable". Both places are glossed as *[ṭhitasabhāvā]{lang="sa"}*. It
    seems this is in reference to the fact that the Buddhist Vinaya is
    gentle and flexible. The Buddha was ready to alter and adjust
    details when circumstances required, yet the fundamental principles
    hold firm.

[^214]: As at [AN
    9.7:3.3](https://suttacentral.net/an9.7/en/sujato#3.3), etc.

[^215]: It is possible to remember the past, but knowledge of the future
    is restricted to inferences in specific contexts and cannot be
    predicted in general.

[^216]: The Buddha claims no gift of prophecy, unlike some other sages,
    but he knows that which matters.

[^217]: See [AN 4.23](https://suttacentral.net/an4.23/en/sujato) and
    [Iti 112](https://suttacentral.net/iti112/en/sujato).

[^218]: Here these questions follow on from the Buddha's acknowledgment
    of epistemological limitations. Not everything can be known, and if
    it is, it is not always useful to speak of it.

[^219]: In the [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato)).

[^220]: The [Brahmajālasutta]{lang="sa"} describes the path to the end
    of these views in terms of understanding dependent origination
    through contemplation of contact in the six senses ([DN
    1:3.71.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#3.71.12)). The
    Buddhist path is integrated, so one part always implies the whole.

[^221]: This is one of the latest suttas in the Pali
    [Nikāyas]{lang="sa"}. Typically this topic only comes up in relation
    to the Buddha's fulfillment of Brahmanical prophecies. Here it is
    developed with a series of ornate verses, none of which have
    parallels. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that nowhere in the
    extensive discussions of the Buddha's past good deeds is there any
    mention of the later concepts of the *[pāramīs]{lang="sa"}*
    ("perfections") or the Bodhisatta path.

[^222]: The marks are elsewhere listed in [DN
    14:1.32.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.32.7) and [MN
    91:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#9.1). I discuss the
    translation of the marks in my comments to DN 14.

[^223]: The later astrological texts such as the
    [Gārgīyajyotiṣa]{lang="sa"} and [Bṛhatsaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} that
    discuss similar marks are more concerned with how they indicate
    character and destiny than their moral causes.

[^224]: The key terms here are *[daḷha]{lang="sa"}* ("firm") and
    *avatthita* ("persistently"), which result in his firm stance.

[^225]: K.R. Norman's series of five articles on *The Metres of the
    [Lakkhaṇa]{lang="sa"}-suttanta* discusses the verses in detail, and
    my translation is indebted to him. He notes that the 20 verse
    passages employ no less than seven distinct metres, all of them
    either new or updated styles. Such a display of poetic virtuosity is
    rare in the Pali canon.

[^226]: The commentary confirms the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading
    *khambhana* ("obstacle") here rather than PTS *gabbha* ('womb").

[^227]: He "conveyed happiness" (*[sukhāvaho]{lang="sa"}*), like a
    wheeled cart would convey goods. \| *[Parivāra]{lang="sa"}* means
    "surroundings, accompaniments", and I follow the commentary, which
    takes it in the sense of the "trimmings" accompanying the food.
    Given, however, that the kammic result is a large
    *[parivāra]{lang="sa"}* ("following"), it might mean that he gave
    not just physical things, but was generous with his followers also,
    engaging them in such beneficial tasks.

[^228]: This refers to the late legend of the soothsayers seeing the
    baby Siddhattha, and as such *[kumāra]{lang="sa"}* should be taken
    as "prince".

[^229]: Giving up killing results in long life. This seems to be applied
    by metaphor to having these long and elegant body parts.

[^230]: Whereas in the phrase *brahmujugatto*, *brahm-* means "extended,
    tall", here *[brahmāva]{lang="sa"}* means "like
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}", either as a play on words or by mistaken
    etymology.

[^231]: This verse spoken by the soothsayers.

[^232]: He receives bodily fullness as a result of giving food.

[^233]: "Tender" because he treated people tenderly; "serried" because
    his fingers and toes are kept gracefully together, not splayed and
    separated.

[^234]: "Inclusive and well-managed" renders *[saṅgahita]{lang="sa"}*.
    It means "included", as in those people who, due to the kindly
    actions, feel that they belong. For the sense "well-managed" see [AN
    8.49:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an8.49/en/sujato#2.3). Because of
    acting kindly and inclusively, people are well-disposed and work
    well together.

[^235]: Even though the community is geographically dispersed, it is
    still coherent.

[^236]: Perhaps the uprightness of these marks relates to his speech
    being beneficial, leading upwards.

[^237]: It seems that his "swift" teaching techniques evoke the
    antelope.

[^238]: Read *anomanikkamo*.

[^239]: Asking questions leads to wisdom, and the mind of wisdom does
    not get attached.

[^240]: Giving fine coverings leads to fine skin. Less obviously, anger
    is said to lead to discoloring and ugliness.

[^241]: For this positive sense of *[adhiṭṭhahi]{lang="sa"}* compare [AN
    6.52:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.52/en/sujato#8.2) and [MN
    140:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#11.1).

[^242]: There's a play on *abhivissaji* ("gave away") and *abhivassa*
    ("pouring rain").

[^243]: *Kanaka*, one of the many Indic words for gold, is from the same
    Proto-Indo European root as the English word "honey".

[^244]: Here *mokkha* = *[pāmokkha]{lang="sa"}* ("chief, best").

[^245]: The penis is the generative organ and hence part-creator of
    family. Being covered suggests that his sexuality was moderated and
    contained. His role was more than having children, it was building
    family.

[^246]: The banyan tree is not just proportioned, it offers shelter to
    many creatures. Touching the knees indicates connecting with the
    manyfolk, who at [AN
    5.196:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an5.196/en/sujato#3.1) are
    likened to caterpillars reaching the knees.

[^247]: A *khema* is a sanctuary where animals flourish in peace,
    without fear of the hunter. Likewise, the Buddha's body flourishes
    and has a fullness to it. He is slim but not skinny.

[^248]: Decline in *dhamma* is missing here, but present both above and
    below in verse.

[^249]: The "ridged taste buds" are not merely for tasting, but support
    excellent digestion. Kammically, the rationale is that since he did
    not kill others, now nothing hurts him when he eats.

[^250]: Dark colored eyes give the impression of wide pupils and an open
    gaze, while the eyelashes of cows lend them a tenderness.

[^251]: *Abhiyogino* ("soothsayers") is a unique term, explained by the
    commentary, "they are dedicated to the lore of marks".

[^252]: The commentary says he took the lead in good deeds
    "unembarrassed, with head held high, his head filled with rapture
    and joy".

[^253]: One hair per pore, because his words of truth have only one
    meaning. Likewise, the tuft conveys purity and integrity.

[^254]: The number four connotes "all around, complete, universal",
    primarily from the four directions. It is multiplied to eight with
    the intermediate directions, and ten including above and below.
    Forty, then, is four times ten, a number of super-inclusiveness or
    super-universality. The lack of gaps corresponds with the lack of
    division between his followers.

[^255]: The commentary explains that those who flap their mouths with
    nonsensical gossip end up with weak or misshapen jaws.

[^256]: His teeth are not "crooked" or "stained" by corruption.

[^257]: The commentary explain *[akhilamanimittamakaṇṭakaṁ]{lang="sa"}*
    as "free of bandits" (*[niccoraṁ]{lang="sa"}*).

[^258]: [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"} only appears in this sutta. His name means
    "little jackal".

[^259]: Śatapatha [Brāhmaṇa]{lang="sa"} 5.5.1 recommends offerings to
    Agni in the east, Indra or Soma in the south, the All-gods in the
    west, Mitra and [Varuṇa]{lang="sa"} in the north, and
    [Bṛhaspati]{lang="sa"} in the middle. The quarters themselves are
    divine, since one can travel them and never reach the end
    ([Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.1.5). Atharva
    Veda 12.3.7--10 gives a domestic prayer for the quarters; here Yama
    dwells in the south with the Fathers, while Soma is in the west, and
    the other directions are not associated with specific deities.
    [Maitrī]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 7.1--6 details the
    spiritual meanings of the six quarters. In Buddhism, the quarters
    are said to be inhabited by the respective Four Great Kings as per
    [DN 32](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato).

[^260]: [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"} followed blindly without considering the
    meaning as urged by [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"}
    1.3.11.

[^261]: It is unusual to find "six" directions. Normally it is four,
    then eight (with intermediate directions), then ten (above and
    below). [Praśna]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 1.6 lists the six,
    then the intermediates.

[^262]: The Buddha outlines the contents of the discourse to follow.

[^263]: The teaching is structured to reinforce memorization. Give the
    number of items (twice), so you will notice if any are missing; list
    the items; recapitulate the numbers; then recapitulate the items
    once more in verse.

[^264]: First we learned what the bad deeds were, now we learn why
    people do them.

[^265]: "Drains on wealth" is *[apāyamukha]{lang="sa"}*, literally
    "openings for departure". This is emphasized here since
    [Sigālaka]{lang="sa"} wants to be a good son and not squander the
    family fortune.

[^266]: The most common phrase in Pali for alcoholic beverages lists
    three items. *[Surā]{lang="sa"}* is brewed from grains with yeast
    ([Bu Pc
    51:2.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc51/en/sujato#2.1.2))
    *Meraya* is made from flowers, fruits, or sugars ([Bu Pc
    51:2.1.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc51/en/sujato#2.1.4)).
    *Madya* is apparently a catchall. Together they correspond fairly
    well with the modern classification of alcoholic drinks as "beer,
    wine, and liquor". See also Manu 11.94, [Arthaśāstra]{lang="sa"}
    2.25, [Suśrutasaṁhitā]{lang="sa"} 1.45,
    [Amarakośodghāṭana]{lang="sa"} 3.6.

[^267]: Now each of the six drains on wealth are expanded and explained.

[^268]: *[Vārunī]{lang="sa"}* is said to have been distilled from
    hogweed with palm sap, "toddy".

[^269]: Assume *[vāruṇī]{lang="sa"}* is a truncated instrumental.

[^270]: *[Kāhiti]{lang="sa"}* is third person singular future of
    *karoti*.

[^271]: The subcommentary explains *[atthā]{lang="sa"}* as
    *[dhanā]{lang="sa"}* ("riches").

[^272]: Having explained the six drains on wealth, the Buddha moves on
    to the next item in the table of contents.

[^273]: Parents are in the east because that is where the sun is born.
    Tutors are to the south (*[dakkhiṇā]{lang="sa"}*) as they are owed
    an offering (*[dakkhiṇā]{lang="sa"}*). Family is one's legacy, so
    they lie with the setting sun in the west. Good friends keep you on
    the upright way to the north. Servants support you and make your
    life possible, like the earth below. And spiritual teachers lead you
    to heaven or transcendence above.

[^274]: "Protection in every region" (*[disāsu]{lang="sa"}
    [parittāṇaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) refers to when the student has completed
    their studies and goes off to travel, the teacher does what they can
    to ensure their safety in other regions.

[^275]: Marriage is based on mutual care and respect, not on dominance
    and obedience.

[^276]: This discourse bears similarities to the
    [Mahāsamayasutta]{lang="sa"} ([DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato)). Thematically, that
    discourse is about the devotion of the deities, whereas this is
    about protection for the mendicants. \| I believe this is only place
    in whole canon that lists the *[bhāṇavāra]{lang="sa"}* at the start.

[^277]: Here Kuvera is called [Vessavaṇa]{lang="sa"}, which our text
    below explains as being derived from the name of his city.

[^278]: "Protection" is *[rakkhā]{lang="sa"}*, which is a synonym of
    *paritta*.

[^279]: For these verses, I lean heavily on the translation by
    Ānandajoti, *[The Āṭānāṭiya
    Discourse](https://suttacentral.nethttps://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-Translations/Safeguard/03-Tatiyakabhanavaram.htm)*.
    They are commonly recited in Theravada countries today. The recital
    begins with the seven Buddhas, for which see [DN
    14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato).

[^280]: Here [Aṅgīrasa]{lang="sa"} is used as a name rather than a
    descriptive epithet. [Aṅgīras]{lang="sa"} was one of the Vedic sages
    and the [Aṅgīrasas]{lang="sa"} are his descendants.
    [Aṅgīras]{lang="sa"} is regarded as the *pravara* or revered
    ancestor of the Gotama clan. Both names are associated with light:
    *[aṅgīrasa]{lang="sa"}* shares a root and is often synonymous with
    *agni* ("fire"), while *gotama* means "light dispelling dark".

[^281]: Here begins a series of verses dedicated to the divinities in
    each of the four quarters, proceeding in the standard way: east,
    south, west, north.

[^282]: This is according to the commentary (*[taṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [rahadaṁ]{lang="sa"} tattha [evaṁ]{lang="sa"}
    [jānanti]{lang="sa"}*).

[^283]: This relates back to the basic problem facing the *yakkhas*:
    shame. They know what they do is wrong, but they like it and hence
    feel shame when hearing the Dhamma. But the Buddha treats them with
    respect, without shaming or bias, and thus is able to lead them to
    the good. The commentary implicitly connects this line with [DN
    30:2.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.1.2), where the
    Buddha "examines" (*samekkhati*) the population for their individual
    and shared traits.

[^284]: The south has the shortest and least auspicious description. To
    the extent that it relates to physical geography, this echoes the
    perception of northerners at the time that the south of India lay
    outside the "civilized" realms (*[āryāvarta]{lang="sa"}*).

[^285]: The description of the west mirrors the east.

[^286]: The description of the north is by far the most elaborate. \|
    "Uttarakuru" is literally "north Kuru". It is mentioned in Sanskrit
    and Greek literature, where it sometimes appears as an actual
    country and other times as a place of fantasy. Attempts to locate it
    in a specific region in or beyond the Himalayas have proven
    inconclusive.

[^287]: Meru is another place that appears sometimes as a physical
    mountain and other times purely mystical. As home of the gods ([Snp
    3.11:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato#4.3)), its peak
    is accessible only by psychic powers ([Thig
    14.1:19.3](https://suttacentral.net/thig14.1/en/sujato#19.3), [MN
    50:30.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#30.1)). It is the
    center of the world in Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain cosmologies. Today
    it is sometimes identified with Mount Kailash.

[^288]: This agrees with the description at [AN
    9.21:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an9.21/en/sujato#1.3).

[^289]: Due to their lack of selfishness, they live in a kinder state of
    nature, which we selfish humans have lost ([DN
    27:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#16.1)).

[^290]: *[Tuṇḍikīre]{lang="sa"}* is explained by the commentary as
    "firestone". In the notes to his translation, Walshe suggests a
    relation with tandoor, which has been found as far back as the Indus
    Valley Civilization, a millennium before the Buddha.

[^291]: Cloven and uncloven was an important classification of animals
    in the [Dharmaśāstras]{lang="sa"}.

[^292]: The commentary says they were mostly carried on the backs of
    pregnant women (!). But the verb *anuyanti* indicates, rather, that
    they were "drawn along after", which suggests a rickshaw.

[^293]: The discourse is named after the first of these cities. The name
    is hard to explain, but all the names in this series have the
    element *[nāṭa]{lang="sa"}*, which is probably the name of the
    people. One meaning of *[nāṭa]{lang="sa"}* is "dance", and one of
    the unique features of this discourse is that each of the Four Great
    Kings is said to delight in song and dance. There is a long history
    of dancing divinities in India, and images of dancers go back as far
    as the Indus Valley Civilization. If we take *[nāṭa]{lang="sa"}* in
    the sense "the people of the dance", *[kusināṭā]{lang="sa"}* would
    therefore be "dancers of the grass" after the *kusa* grass essential
    to the Vedic rites of kingship. *[Parakusināṭā]{lang="sa"}* is the
    "further dancers of the grass", and *[parakusiṭanāṭā]{lang="sa"}* is
    probably a variation on that. *[Nāṭapuriyā]{lang="sa"}* is the
    "citadel of the dancers". Each of these associates the people of the
    dance with the idea of protection or authority, agreeing with the
    context, where the cities are said to belong to a great king. Thus
    the prefix *[āṭā]{lang="sa"}-* probably stems from
    *[tāṇa]{lang="sa"}* ("shelter, refuge"; the same root as *paritta*),
    in the sense of the "refuge of the dancers".

[^294]: Adopt the reading *[nāṭapuriyā]{lang="sa"}* found in
    Sinhalese-script manuscripts against the [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"}'s
    *[nāṭasuriyā]{lang="sa"}*.

[^295]: "Abounding in monkeys".

[^296]: "Flood of folk".

[^297]: *Navanavutiya* is "the city of the ninety-nine" i.e. three times
    thirty-three. \| *Ambara* is "sky".

[^298]: Also encountered at [DN
    17:1.3.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.3.8) and [DN
    16:5.18.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.18.5).
    [Alakā]{lang="sa"} is the capital of Kuvera in Sanskrit sources.

[^299]: The city [Visāṇa]{lang="sa"} is not encountered elsewhere, but
    it means "horn", possibly reinforcing the importance of "song and
    dance".

[^300]: These three names appear to be purely onomatopoeic, perhaps
    echoing musical sounds.

[^301]: These names suggest a connection with sustenance: "Nutritive",
    "Powerful", "Nourished by That".

[^302]: These are a set of associated solar names. [Ariṭṭha]{lang="sa"}
    and Nemi appear compounded in Sanskrit, [Ariṣṭanemi]{lang="sa"},
    which evokes the powerful chariot of a conqueror ("indestructible
    rim", Rig Veda 1.89.6, 1.180.10, 3.53.17, 10.178.1). It was the name
    of the 22nd Jain *[tīrthaṅkara]{lang="sa"}*, and in Brahmanical
    texts of several figures, including a dragon
    ([Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"} 1.59.39a, 1114.62a, etc.) and an Asura
    king ([Bhāgavatapurāṇa]{lang="sa"} 8.6.31, 8.10.10). Along with the
    divine steed [Tārkṣya]{lang="sa"}, he is associated with
    [Garuḍa]{lang="sa"}, and was probably originally an epithet for the
    unstoppable wheel of the Sun, [Sūra]{lang="sa"}. This line, then,
    while a simple list of four names in Pali, appears to be a
    fragmented memory of a Vedic conception which might be translated:
    "King Sun, (the wheel) of indestructible rim".

[^303]: *[Dharaṇī]{lang="sa"}* the "bearer" is also a pregnant woman or
    Mother Earth.

[^304]: *[Sāla]{lang="sa"}* means "hall" or "sal tree", but the
    commentary says it was surrounded by creepers of that name.

[^305]: *[Kuḷīrakā]{lang="sa"}* appears to be the name of a crab-eating
    bird (*[kuḷīra]{lang="sa"}*). In honor of my native country, I name
    it after the kookaburra, which eats crabs and is renowned for its
    cry.

[^306]: In [Ja
    547:426.2](https://suttacentral.net/ja547/en/sujato#426.2) we find
    *[koṭṭhā]{lang="sa"} [pokkharasātakā]{lang="sa"}*, where the
    *[koṭṭha]{lang="sa"}* is evidently a woodpecker. *Satapatta* can
    mean woodpecker or lotus (or crane or peacock), and perhaps there is
    an association here, the "hundred-leaved \[bird\] of the lotus
    pond".

[^307]: For these gods, see my comment on [DN
    13:25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#25.2). Here I will
    comment on the names not discussed elsewhere, especially in [DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato).

[^308]: This is presumably [Bharadvāja]{lang="sa"}
    [Bārhaspatya]{lang="sa"}, the rishi ancestor of the
    [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} clan, many members of which are encountered
    in the suttas. It is unusual to find him listed along with the
    primary Vedic gods. The [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} verses are mostly
    collected in the sixth book of the Rig Veda, where they show a
    special devotion to the god [Pūṣan]{lang="sa"}.

[^309]: These deities appear nowhere else. *[Puṇṇaka]{lang="sa"}* is
    "full", *[guḷa]{lang="sa"}* is "lump", and *karatiya* is unclear
    ("bean-like"?).

[^310]: The *yakkha* Sivaka ("blissful, auspicious") helped
    [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"} visit the Buddha ([SN
    10.8:1.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.8/en/sujato#1.12)); he is
    possibly to be identified with Shiva. \| The dragon king Mucalinda
    sheltered the Buddha after his awakening ([Ud
    2.1:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/ud2.1/en/sujato#2.2)).

[^311]: *Yugandhara* is the tutelary deity of the mountain of that name.

[^312]: *[Gopāla]{lang="sa"}* is "cowherd", an epithet of both Krishna
    and Shiva.\| *Suppagedha* (or *supparodha*) is obscure.

[^313]: "Shame", "conduit" (or "craving"), and "stupidity" seem like odd
    companions.

[^314]: A saying by [Pañcālacaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} at [SN
    2.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.7/en/sujato) is quoted by
    [Udāyī]{lang="sa"} and explained by Ānanda at [AN
    9.42](https://suttacentral.net/an9.42/en/sujato). He would appear to
    be the wrathful (*[caṇḍa]{lang="sa"}*) protector of the
    [Pañcāla]{lang="sa"} clan, but a [Pañcālacanda]{lang="sa"} appears
    as a brahmin teacher at Aitereya [Āraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} 3.1.6. \|
    [Āḷavaka]{lang="sa"} is the tutelary deity of [Āḷavī]{lang="sa"}
    ([SN 10.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.12/en/sujato), [Snp
    1.10](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.10/en/sujato)).

[^315]: *Sumana* is "Happyheart", *sumukha* is "Fairface".

[^316]: *Dadhimukha* is "Milkface", and in the [Mahābhārata]{lang="sa"}
    is a name of a dragon. \| *[Maṇi]{lang="sa"}* is "gem". \|
    *[Māṇivara]{lang="sa"}* is "fine gem", although the commentary takes
    this as two names. \| [Dīgha]{lang="sa"} is identified by the
    commentary with [Dīgha]{lang="sa"} Parajana of [MN
    31:21.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn31/en/sujato#21.1).

[^317]: *[Serīsaka]{lang="sa"}* means "of *[sirīsa]{lang="sa"}* wood",
    perhaps the tutelary deity of a forest.

[^318]: This discourse picks up from [DN
    29:17.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#17.1), where the
    Buddha urges that the Sangha should gather and recite the Dhamma for
    the long lasting of the dispensation. There he lists the 37 factors
    of awakening, a standard early collation of practice-oriented
    teachings that are primarily collected in the [Mahāvagga]{lang="sa"}
    of the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}. This discourse is
    a late one, and appears to be an initial attempt to compile a more
    thorough list of the Buddha's teachings. The
    [Sarvāstivāda]{lang="sa"} version of the same discourse formed the
    basis of one of their seven Abhidhamma books, the
    [Sangītiparyāya]{lang="sa"}.

[^319]: At [AN 10.176](https://suttacentral.net/an10.176/en/sujato)
    Cunda asks about the purity of the western brahmins; at [DN
    16:4.13.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#4.13.5) = [Ud
    8.5](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.5/en/sujato) he offers the
    Buddha's last meal; at [Snp
    1.5](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.5/en/sujato) he asks about a true
    ascetic.

[^320]: The completion of a town hall was celebrated by a talk for the
    Sakyans [SN
    35.243:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.243/en/sujato#1.2) and [MN
    53:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn53/en/sujato#2.1). Such halls
    were community meeting places that played a central role in civic
    society and communal decision-making in democratic republics such as
    the Mallas and the Sakyans. The Buddha's participation is a sign of
    his support for their civic and democratic process.

[^321]: As at [DN
    16:5.19.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.19.2), the
    Mallas are called [Vāseṭṭhas]{lang="sa"} after the family lineage of
    their priest (*purohita*).

[^322]: The Buddha likewise mentions his bad back and invites another
    monk to teach in both the other suttas where he is first to teach in
    a new hall ([MN
    53:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn53/en/sujato#5.3), [SN
    35.243:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.243/en/sujato#3.4)), and
    also on the *uposatha* at [Naḷakapāna]{lang="sa"} ([AN
    10.67](https://suttacentral.net/an10.67/en/sujato), [AN
    10.68](https://suttacentral.net/an10.68/en/sujato)). These were all
    occasions when the community was sitting late into the night.

[^323]: As at [DN 29:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#1.3)
    and [MN 104:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#2.1), in
    both of which the Buddha was in the Sakyan lands at this time.
    There, the news is conveyed to the Buddha by the novice Cunda.
    Perhaps he was confused with Cunda the smith.

[^324]: [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} adopts the "[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}
    principle" of arranging teachings by number rather than the
    "[Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} principle" of arrangement by topic. Thus this
    list of teachings has more in common with the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}
    [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} than with the Buddha's original list of
    [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} topics. I note unusual or rare terms, but the
    references here are meant to be indicative rather than
    comprehensive.

[^325]: [AN
    10.27:10.5](https://suttacentral.net/an10.27/en/sujato#10.5), [AN
    10.28:4.5](https://suttacentral.net/an10.28/en/sujato#4.5), [Kp
    4:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/kp4/en/sujato#1.2).

[^326]: This phrase is unique, but here *[saṅkhārā]{lang="sa"}*
    ("conditions") is a synonym of *[āhāra]{lang="sa"}* ("food, fuel,
    nutriment").

[^327]: The paucity of teachings of "one" reflects the fact that the
    [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} Ones consists mostly of
    longer teachings that have been split into atoms to artificially
    create "ones".

[^328]: [AN 4.254:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.254/en/sujato#3.2).

[^329]: [AN 2.91:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an2.91/en/sujato#1.3),
    [SN 22.80:9.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.80/en/sujato#9.2).

[^330]: These Vinaya concepts also at [AN
    2.97:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an2.97/en/sujato#1.3).

[^331]: [AN 2.163:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an2.163/en/sujato#1.3).

[^332]: [AN 2.96:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an2.96/en/sujato#1.3).

[^333]: [MN 115:3.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn115/en/sujato#3.3).

[^334]: [MN 115:3.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn115/en/sujato#3.3).

[^335]: [AN 2.11:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11/en/sujato#1.3).

[^336]: *Samathanimitta* at [SN
    46.2:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.2/en/sujato#14.2) and [SN
    46.51:11.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.51/en/sujato#11.2);
    *paggahanimitta* at [AN
    3.102](https://suttacentral.net/an3.102/en/sujato).

[^337]: "Knowledge of ending" (*khaye [ñāṇaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) refers to the
    aggregates; it is discussed at [SN
    12.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.23/en/sujato). \| "Knowledge of
    non-arising" (*[anuppāde]{lang="sa"} [ñāṇaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) is the
    knowledge that one will not be born again.

[^338]: [SN 14.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn14.13/en/sujato), [AN
    3.76](https://suttacentral.net/an3.76/en/sujato), [AN
    3.77](https://suttacentral.net/an3.77/en/sujato).

[^339]: At [AN 4.33:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.33/en/sujato#2.2)
    cessation is the middle, not an extreme. But [SN
    22.103](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.103/en/sujato) has four
    extremes.

[^340]: [SN 38.14:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn38.14/en/sujato#1.4),
    [SN 45.165:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.165/en/sujato#1.3).

[^341]: The "right way" is the eightfold path, the "wrong way" the
    opposite ([SN 45.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.21/en/sujato).
    "Surety in the right way" is mentioned often (eg. [AN
    5.151](https://suttacentral.net/an5.151/en/sujato)), but "surety in
    the wrong way" seems to be found only in later texts. "Lack of
    surety" is impermanence. And elsewhere these are not said to be
    "heaps".

[^342]: Despite the explanation, and the prevalence of reading
    *[kaṅkhā]{lang="sa"}*, the commentary requires the
    [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} reading *tama*.

[^343]: [AN 7.58](https://suttacentral.net/an7.58/en/sujato).

[^344]: [AN 7.47:12.3](https://suttacentral.net/an7.47/en/sujato#12.3).
    \| For *[dakkhiṇeyyaggi]{lang="sa"}*, compare Sanskrit
    *[dakṣiṇāgni]{lang="sa"}*, a fire sacrifice for ancestors
    established in a hearth to the south.

[^345]: Elsewhere found only in Abhidhamma. "Visible and resistant"
    refers to material phenomena perceivable by the eye. "Invisible and
    resistant" is a shorthand for material phenomena that are not
    perceivable by the eye, but which nonetheless impinge on other
    senses, such as sounds or smells. "Invisible and non-resistant"
    includes form perceived solely in the mind.

[^346]: The last item is elsewhere found only in Abhidhamma texts. A
    "trainee" is a noble one who has at least entered the path to
    stream-entry; an "adept" (*asekkha*) has completed their training;
    one who is neither is yet to begin.

[^347]: Only found here.

[^348]: [Iti 95](https://suttacentral.net/iti95/en/sujato).

[^349]: The first is unique, the next two from [AN
    5.170](https://suttacentral.net/an5.170/en/sujato).

[^350]: These are Abhidhamma categories.

[^351]: Otherwise found only in Abhidhamma and other late texts.

[^352]: The "weapon of learning" is at [AN
    7.67:17.3](https://suttacentral.net/an7.67/en/sujato#17.3), the
    "weapon of wisdom" in verse at [Dhp
    40:3](https://suttacentral.net/dhp40/en/sujato#3) and [Thag
    16.3:17.3](https://suttacentral.net/thag16.3/en/sujato#17.3).

[^353]: Found at [SN
    48.23:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn48.23/en/sujato#1.3) and [Iti
    62:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/iti62/en/sujato#2.3), this went on
    to become a standard Abhidhamma set.

[^354]: The first two at [MN
    36](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato).

[^355]: [MN 35:26.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#26.2).

[^356]: This threefold presentation of the process of absorption focuses
    on *vitakka* ("placing the mind") and *[vicāra]{lang="sa"}*
    ("keeping it connected"), looking closely at how they cease (see
    also [DN 34:1.4.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.4.7),
    [MN 128:31.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn128/en/sujato#31.4), [SN
    43.3:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn43.3/en/sujato#1.2), and [AN
    8.63:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.63/en/sujato#3.1)). The
    standard *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}* formula focuses more on the refinement
    of feelings, from which perspective the first two stages of
    immersion here fall under the "rapture and bliss born of seclusion",
    while only the third qualifies as "rapture and bliss born of
    immersion". Thus Analayo describes the two descriptions' as
    "complementary perspectives on the same process of deepening
    concentration" (*Comparative Study*, vol. ii, pg. 739, note 263).

[^357]: [AN
    3.183--352:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.183-352/en/sujato#1.3).

[^358]: [AN 3.121](https://suttacentral.net/an3.121/en/sujato), [Iti
    66](https://suttacentral.net/iti66/en/sujato).

[^359]: [AN 3.122](https://suttacentral.net/an3.122/en/sujato), [Iti
    67](https://suttacentral.net/iti67/en/sujato).

[^360]: [AN 6.79:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an6.79/en/sujato#1.3);
    explained at [Vb
    16:259.1](https://suttacentral.net/vb16/en/sujato#259.1). These
    passages, and [Thag
    2.19:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.19/en/sujato#2.1), are the
    earliest appearances of the phrase "skill in means"
    (*[upāyakosalla]{lang="sa"}*) that would become famous in later
    Buddhism.

[^361]: [AN 3.39:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.39/en/sujato#6.3).

[^362]: [AN 3.40:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.40/en/sujato#1.3).

[^363]: [AN 3.67](https://suttacentral.net/an3.67/en/sujato).

[^364]: Called "high and luxurious beds" at [AN
    3.63:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.63/en/sujato#5.3).

[^365]: [AN 3.60:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/an3.60/en/sujato#8.3).

[^366]: [AN 4.41](https://suttacentral.net/an4.41/en/sujato).

[^367]: These are described as "limitless" in the formula, but this is
    the only early text they are called the "four limitless states" (or
    "immeasurables"). This is a sign of systematization.

[^368]: Often described as "formless", here is the only place we find
    "four formless states" (*[āruppā]{lang="sa"}*).

[^369]: [AN 10.20:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.20/en/sujato#6.1).

[^370]: [AN 4.28](https://suttacentral.net/an4.28/en/sujato). The
    sequence of *[pahāna]{lang="sa"}* ("giving up") and
    *[bhāvanā]{lang="sa"}* ("meditation") is swapped as compared with
    [AN 4.28:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an4.28/en/sujato#4.1).

[^371]: [AN 4.14](https://suttacentral.net/an4.14/en/sujato).

[^372]: The first two are found at [SN
    12.33:14.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.33/en/sujato#14.2). The
    four are found at [DN
    34:1.5.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.5.3).

[^373]: [SN 55.50:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.50/en/sujato#1.1).

[^374]: This discourse distinguishes the "factors of a stream-enterer"
    (*[sotāpannassa]{lang="sa"} [aṅgāni]{lang="sa"}*) from the "factors
    of stream-entry" (*[sotāpattiyaṅgāni]{lang="sa"}*), but elsewhere
    only the latter term is used [SN
    12.42:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.42/en/sujato#3.1), [AN
    9.28:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.28/en/sujato#4.1).

[^375]: [SN 45.35:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.35/en/sujato#1.8).

[^376]: [MN 9:11.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn9/en/sujato#11.4), [SN
    12.11:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.11/en/sujato#1.5), etc.

[^377]: [SN 22.54:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.54/en/sujato#2.1),
    etc.

[^378]: [AN 4.18](https://suttacentral.net/an4.18/en/sujato), etc.

[^379]: [AN 4.9](https://suttacentral.net/an4.9/en/sujato).

[^380]: [AN 4.163](https://suttacentral.net/an4.163/en/sujato).

[^381]: [AN 4.29](https://suttacentral.net/an4.29/en/sujato).

[^382]: [AN 9.5:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.5/en/sujato#1.1).

[^383]: [MN 140:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#11.1).

[^384]: [AN 3.67:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an3.67/en/sujato#2.2).

[^385]: By treating ethical decisions via a tetralemma, the Buddha
    rejects the "law of the excluded middle" and the consequent belief
    that acts must be either right or wrong.

[^386]: [MN 57:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn57/en/sujato#7.1), [AN
    4.236](https://suttacentral.net/an4.236/en/sujato).

[^387]: [AN 4.189](https://suttacentral.net/an4.189/en/sujato), but the
    order there is direct experience, recollection, vision, wisdom.

[^388]: [SN
    35.238:12.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.238/en/sujato#12.2), etc.

[^389]: This and the next at [AN
    4.10](https://suttacentral.net/an4.10/en/sujato).

[^390]: [SN 45.174](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.174/en/sujato).

[^391]: [MN 12:32.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#32.1). The
    four describe the births of different kinds of *[nāga]{lang="sa"}*,
    etc. (eg. [SN 29.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn29.1/en/sujato)).

[^392]: [DN 28:5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato#5.2).

[^393]: [AN 4.171](https://suttacentral.net/an4.171/en/sujato).

[^394]: [AN 4.78](https://suttacentral.net/an4.78/en/sujato), [MN
    142:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn142/en/sujato#9.1).

[^395]: [AN 4.32](https://suttacentral.net/an4.32/en/sujato).

[^396]: This and the next are found in [AN
    4.250](https://suttacentral.net/an4.250/en/sujato), etc., but there
    defined, as below, in terms of speech about what you've seen, heard,
    thought, or known.

[^397]: [AN 4.198](https://suttacentral.net/an4.198/en/sujato). \| "With
    self become divine" (*[brahmabhūtena]{lang="sa"}
    [attanā]{lang="sa"}*) deliberately echoes [Upaniṣadic]{lang="sa"}
    language. Pali is sometimes said to lack reference to the cosmic
    Brahman (in neuter), having only the personal [Brahmā]{lang="sa"}
    (in masculine). The grammatical case of *brahma-* in the compound
    here is undetermined, yet no scholar of Sanskrit would hesitate to
    interpret the common phrase *[brahmabhūtātmā]{lang="sa"}* in the
    sense "self become one with the cosmic divinity Brahman". Surely the
    Pali draws from the same sense, using it to describe
    [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}.

[^398]: [AN 4.85](https://suttacentral.net/an4.85/en/sujato), [SN
    3.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.21/en/sujato).

[^399]: [AN 4.87](https://suttacentral.net/an4.87/en/sujato), etc.

[^400]: For the distinction between "aggregates" and "grasping
    aggregates" see [SN
    22.48](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.48/en/sujato), [SN
    22.82](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.82/en/sujato), [MN
    109](https://suttacentral.net/mn109/en/sujato).

[^401]: Also at [MN
    12:35.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#35.3). Later the
    *asura* ("demon" or "titan") realm was added as the sixth. The
    number and nature of different realms is always somewhat fluid.

[^402]: [AN 5.255:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.255/en/sujato#1.3).

[^403]: [AN 9.8:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/an9.8/en/sujato#3.4), [DN
    29:26.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#26.8), [MN
    76:51.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn76/en/sujato#51.3).

[^404]: This and the next at [AN
    5.130](https://suttacentral.net/an5.130/en/sujato).

[^405]: Also at [AN 5.213](https://suttacentral.net/an5.213/en/sujato),
    [Ud 8.6:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/ud8.6/en/sujato#4.1), [DN
    16:1.23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#1.23.2), and [Kd
    6:28.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd6/en/sujato#28.4.1).

[^406]: [AN 5.167](https://suttacentral.net/an5.167/en/sujato), [AN
    10.44](https://suttacentral.net/an10.44/en/sujato).

[^407]: [AN 5.53](https://suttacentral.net/an5.53/en/sujato).

[^408]: See [DN
    14:3.31.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.31.1), [MN
    120:21--30.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn120/en/sujato#21-30.7),
    etc.

[^409]: [SN 48.16:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn48.16/en/sujato#1.5),
    etc.

[^410]: [AN 5.205](https://suttacentral.net/an5.205/en/sujato); with the
    next, [AN
    10.14:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.14/en/sujato#1.1), [MN
    16](https://suttacentral.net/mn16/en/sujato).

[^411]: As above, also [AN
    5.206:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an5.206/en/sujato#1.1).

[^412]: [AN 5.200](https://suttacentral.net/an5.200/en/sujato).

[^413]: [AN 5.26](https://suttacentral.net/an5.26/en/sujato).

[^414]: These five are found at [AN
    5.72](https://suttacentral.net/an5.72/en/sujato) and [AN
    5.305](https://suttacentral.net/an5.305/en/sujato), and also as part
    of longer lists. They are not, however, called "perceptions that
    ripen in freedom".

[^415]: As "roots of arguments" at [AN
    6.36:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an6.36/en/sujato#1.5) and [MN
    104:6.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#6.5) (see below),
    and as impossibilities for a stream-enterer at [AN
    6.92](https://suttacentral.net/an6.92/en/sujato).

[^416]: As a cause for the long lasting of the dispensation at [AN
    6.40:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.40/en/sujato#2.2).

[^417]: At [AN
    3.61:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61/en/sujato#12.1) and [MN
    140:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#10.1) these three
    sets of six are combined as the "eighteen mental preoccupations".

[^418]: [AN 6.11](https://suttacentral.net/an6.11/en/sujato).

[^419]: [AN 6.13](https://suttacentral.net/an6.13/en/sujato).

[^420]: [AN 6.30](https://suttacentral.net/an6.30/en/sujato).

[^421]: [AN
    4.195:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/an4.195/en/sujato#10.1).

[^422]: In [AN 6.57](https://suttacentral.net/an6.57/en/sujato) this is
    a response to the doctrine of [Pūraṇa]{lang="sa"} Kassapa.

[^423]: At [AN 6.142](https://suttacentral.net/an6.142/en/sujato) and
    [AN 6.35](https://suttacentral.net/an6.35/en/sujato), but not called
    "perceptions that help penetration".

[^424]: *Ariyadhana* appears to be constructed after
    *[ācariyadhana]{lang="sa"}*, "a teacher's fee", and hence *ariya*
    here would be a noun rather than verb.

[^425]: [AN 7.45](https://suttacentral.net/an7.45/en/sujato).

[^426]: [AN 7.93](https://suttacentral.net/an7.93/en/sujato).

[^427]: [AN 7.94](https://suttacentral.net/an7.94/en/sujato).

[^428]: At [AN 7.68](https://suttacentral.net/an7.68/en/sujato) *dhamma*
    in this context is shown to be "teachings", not "qualities".

[^429]: [AN 7.20](https://suttacentral.net/an7.20/en/sujato).

[^430]: At [AN 7.616](https://suttacentral.net/an7.616/en/sujato), but
    not called "seven perceptions".

[^431]: [AN 7.3](https://suttacentral.net/an7.3/en/sujato), etc.

[^432]: [AN 7.44](https://suttacentral.net/an7.44/en/sujato).

[^433]: Primarily a Vinaya topic ([Kd
    14:14.16.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd14/en/sujato#14.16.1)),
    but also found at [AN
    7.84](https://suttacentral.net/an7.84/en/sujato) and explained at
    [MN 104:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn104/en/sujato#13.1).

[^434]: This and the next at [AN
    8.80](https://suttacentral.net/an8.80/en/sujato).

[^435]: These are just called "gifts" at [AN
    8.31](https://suttacentral.net/an8.31/en/sujato). The "reasons to
    give" at [AN 8.33](https://suttacentral.net/an8.33/en/sujato) are
    different.

[^436]: See [MN 120:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn120/en/sujato#3.4)
    and [AN 8.35:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/an8.35/en/sujato#1.8).

[^437]: "Settled for less" also occurs at [AN
    8.35:1.9](https://suttacentral.net/an8.35/en/sujato#1.9). Readings
    vary between *[hīne]{lang="sa"} [vimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("released in
    what is inferior", per MS) and *[hīne]{lang="sa"}
    '[dhimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}* ("resolved upon what is inferior"). This is
    an example of an ambiguity between *vi + √muc* ("release") and
    *adhi + √muc* ("resolve") that is sometimes seen in Pali texts. The
    subcommentary reads *[vimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}* and offers two
    explanations: "'Released' (*[vimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}*) means 'resolved'
    (*[adhimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}*); the meaning is slants, slopes, and
    inclines. Or else 'released' means 'set free'
    (*[vissaṭṭhaṁ]{lang="sa"}*)." Given that it is clearly accepted in
    the commentarial tradition, and that it is the more difficult
    reading, it seems we must accept *[vimuttaṁ]{lang="sa"}* as the
    correct reading here. But from context, and from the subcommentary,
    it has the same sense as *adhimutta*, namely, "resolved upon". This
    goes some way to explaining the ambiguity between the two words, as
    they not only have a similar form, but their meanings can overlap
    too.

[^438]: Notice that they have "seen" the well-to-do brahmins or
    aristocrats, but have only "heard of" the various deities.

[^439]: Previous rebirths required only ethics. Rebirth in the
    [Brahmā]{lang="sa"} realm, however, requires the freedom of the mind
    from hindrances through practicing absorption.

[^440]: [AN 8.35](https://suttacentral.net/an8.35/en/sujato).

[^441]: [AN 8.69](https://suttacentral.net/an8.69/en/sujato).

[^442]: [AN 8.6](https://suttacentral.net/an8.6/en/sujato).

[^443]: [AN 8.65](https://suttacentral.net/an8.65/en/sujato).

[^444]: [AN 8.66](https://suttacentral.net/an8.66/en/sujato).

[^445]: [AN 9.29](https://suttacentral.net/an9.29/en/sujato).

[^446]: [AN 9.24](https://suttacentral.net/an9.24/en/sujato).

[^447]: [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 1.3.10 warns
    that, because the knowledge of the gods have not reached them, the
    lands beyond the borders are the domain of death.

[^448]: Eight at [AN 8.29](https://suttacentral.net/an8.29/en/sujato)
    and [DN
    34:2.1.122](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.1.122); the
    ninth here is made by adding the *asura* rebirth.

[^449]: [AN 9.33](https://suttacentral.net/an9.33/en/sujato).

[^450]: [AN 9.61](https://suttacentral.net/an9.61/en/sujato).

[^451]: The pre-Buddhist sense of *sati* is "memory", while
    "mindfulness" evolved from the practice of "remembering" scripture,
    creating an uninterrupted flow state in the present. In this sense,
    mindfulness can be understood as the element of continuity that
    knits consciousness together in a coherent stream. Thus when
    practicing "mindfulness of breathing" one pays continuous attention
    to the breaths, not "forgetting" what one is doing.

[^452]: [AN 10.17](https://suttacentral.net/an10.17/en/sujato), [AN
    10.18](https://suttacentral.net/an10.18/en/sujato).

[^453]: [AN 10.25](https://suttacentral.net/an10.25/en/sujato).
    *[Kaṣina]{lang="sa"}* means "universal", "totality", and it refers
    to a measureless state of *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*. In later usage it
    became a term for a physical object, such as a disk, on which a
    meditator focused, but it never has this meaning in early texts.
    [Yājñavalkya]{lang="sa"} says that, just as salt is "entirely"
    salty, the Self is an "entire mass of consciousness"
    (*[kṛtsnaḥ]{lang="sa"} [prajñānaghana]{lang="sa"} eva*,
    [Bṛhadāraṇyaka]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 4.5.13).

[^454]: [AN 10.19](https://suttacentral.net/an10.19/en/sujato).

[^455]: [AN 10.112](https://suttacentral.net/an10.112/en/sujato).

[^456]: As in [DN 4](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato).

[^457]: This discourse is similar to [DN
    33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato); seventy items are
    shared between the two. Here [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} teaches without
    prompting. The scheme is more rigorous; items listed according to a
    specific pattern, then the same pattern is amplified one by one. The
    constraints of this scheme mean that, while almost all the items
    listed here are found elsewhere, they are mostly not known by the
    name used here. This sutta seems a little later than [DN
    33](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato), but such conclusions
    should be drawn cautiously; in at least one detail, the absence of
    the *asura* realm from the "lost opportunities", the passage here is
    earlier.

[^458]: The use of a verse to introduce the teachings is unusual.

[^459]: This echoes [Chāndogya]{lang="sa"} [Upaniṣad]{lang="sa"} 7.26.2,
    *[sarvagranthīnāṁ]{lang="sa"} [vipramokṣaḥ]{lang="sa"}*.

[^460]: Each number from one to ten follows this same scheme.

[^461]: Compare [SN
    3.18:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.18/en/sujato#8.2).

[^462]: Compare [SN
    16.11:12.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn16.11/en/sujato#12.2).

[^463]: Compare [SN
    22.48:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.48/en/sujato#2.2), but this
    is the five aggregates rather than contact.

[^464]: This term is only found in the Ratanasutta ([Snp
    2.1:5.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.1/en/sujato#5.2)). It means a
    kind of meditation that results in the realization of the Dhamma in
    this very life.

[^465]: See [AN 4.254](https://suttacentral.net/an4.254/en/sujato).

[^466]: The "unconditioned element" is [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}, everything
    else is conditioned.

[^467]: With the addition of "rational application of mind" at [AN
    4.249](https://suttacentral.net/an4.249/en/sujato).

[^468]: [Iti 72](https://suttacentral.net/iti72/en/sujato).

[^469]: These three "portions" of knowledge are not found elsewhere, but
    compare eg. [SN 12.34](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.34/en/sujato).

[^470]: [AN 4.31](https://suttacentral.net/an4.31/en/sujato).

[^471]: Described as four "perceptions" at [AN
    4.179](https://suttacentral.net/an4.179/en/sujato).

[^472]: A different group of five factors of immersion is at [AN
    5.28](https://suttacentral.net/an5.28/en/sujato); the final factor
    is the same in both. The first four factors, however, appear only as
    part of this same group in later texts ([Ne
    21:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/ne21/en/sujato#5.1), [Ps
    1.1:246.2](https://suttacentral.net/ps1.1/en/sujato#246.2), [Vb
    16:342.2](https://suttacentral.net/vb16/en/sujato#342.2)).

[^473]: [AN 8.2](https://suttacentral.net/an8.2/en/sujato).

[^474]: At this point, [DN
    33:3.2.53](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#3.2.53) has an
    extra possibility, rebirth among the titans, making nine in all.

[^475]: The negative is absent from the text due to abbreviation, so it
    is inferred from the parallel passage at [DN
    33:3.2.69](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#3.2.69).

[^476]: [AN 8.30](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato). \| Read
    *[nippapañcārāmassāyaṁ]{lang="sa"}* per [AN
    8.30:3.11](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato#3.11).

[^477]: Similar sequences are found throughout the suttas, but this
    exact sequence appears to be unique.

[^478]: Four are found at [AN
    4.194](https://suttacentral.net/an4.194/en/sujato). Seven, phrased
    slightly differently, are found at [MN
    23](https://suttacentral.net/mn23/en/sujato).

[^479]: [AN 9.23](https://suttacentral.net/an9.23/en/sujato).

[^480]: [SN 14.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn14.9/en/sujato).

[^481]: [AN 9.93](https://suttacentral.net/an9.93/en/sujato).

[^482]: [AN 10.238](https://suttacentral.net/an10.238/en/sujato).

[^483]: The sutta, and hence the [Dīgha]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}
    as a whole, ends with the qualities of the arahant, the one who
    completes the path and practice of the Buddha.
