SUTTA 99

[^908]: Todeyya was a wealthy brahmin, the overlord of Tudigāma, a village near Sāvatthī. MN 135 was also spoken to this same Subha.

[^909]: Vibhajjavädo kho aham ettha. Such statements account for the later designation of Buddhism as vibhajjaväda, "the doctrine of analysis."

[^910]: Obviously at the time trade was still in an early stage of development. The same statement could hardly be made today!

[^911]: As at MN 95.13.

[^912]: This statement must have been made before Pokkhara-
sāti became a follower of the Buddha, as is mentioned at MN 95.9.

[^913]: Anukampājātika.

[^914]: This knowledge pertains to the third of the Tathāgata's powers, knowing the ways to all destinations. See MN 12.12.

[^915]: MA explains limiting action (pamānakatam் kammañ) as kamma pertaining to the sense sphere (kāmāvacara). It is contrasted with a limitless or immeasurable action, namely, the jhānas pertaining to the fine-material sphere or the immaterial sphere. In this case the brahmavihāras developed to the jhānic level are intended. When a jhāna pertaining to the fine-material sphere or the immaterial sphere is attained and mastered, a kamma pertaining to the sense sphere cannot overpower it and gain the opportunity to yield its own result. Rather, the kamma pertaining to the fine-material sphere or the immaterial sphere overpowers the sense-sphere kammas and produces its results. Obstructing the result of the sense-sphere kammas, the brahmavihāra that has been mastered leads to rebirth in the company of Brahmā.

[^916]: As at MN 27.2

