# Linked Discourses on the Elements

## The Chapter on Diversity

### N 14.1 Diversity of Elements *Dhātunānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the diversity of elements. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, sight element,
and eye consciousness element. The ear element, sound element, and ear
consciousness element. The nose element, smell element, and nose
consciousness element. The tongue element, taste element, and tongue
consciousness element. The body element, touch element, and body
consciousness element. The mind element, idea element, and mind
consciousness element. This is called the diversity of elements."

### N 14.2 Diversity of Contacts *Phassanānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts.
And what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element,
nose element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is
called the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts?
The eye element gives rise to eye contact. The ear element ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... The mind element gives rise to mind contact. That's
how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts."

### N 14.3 Not Diversity of Contacts *Nophassanānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts.
Diversity of contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements. And
what is the diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element, nose
element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called
the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts,
while diversity of contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements?
The eye element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact doesn't give rise
to the eye element. ... The mind element gives rise to mind contact.
Mind contact doesn't give rise to the mind element. That's how diversity
of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, while diversity of
contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements."

### N 14.4 Diversity of Feelings *Vedanānānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts,
and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. And what
is the diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element, nose
element, tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called
the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts,
and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings? The eye
element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact gives rise to the feeling
born of eye contact. ... The mind element gives rise to mind contact.
Mind contact gives rise to the feeling born of mind contact. That's how
diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity
of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings."

### N 14.5 Diversity of Feelings (2nd) *Dutiyavedanānānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts.
Diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of
feelings doesn't give rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of
contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements. And what is the
diversity of elements? The eye element, ear element, nose element,
tongue element, body element, and mind element. This is called the
diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts,
and diversity of contacts give rise to diversity of feelings, while
diversity of feelings doesn't give rise to diversity of contacts, and
diversity of contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements? The
eye element gives rise to eye contact. Eye contact gives rise to feeling
born of eye contact. Feeling born of eye contact doesn't give rise to
eye contact. Eye contact doesn't give rise to the eye element. ... The
mind element gives rise to mind contact. Mind contact gives rise to
feeling born of mind contact. Feeling born of mind contact doesn't give
rise to mind contact. Mind contact doesn't give rise to the mind
element. That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of
contacts, and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings,
while diversity of feelings doesn't give rise to diversity of contacts,
and diversity of contacts doesn't give rise to diversity of elements."

### N 14.6 External Diversity of Elements *Bāhiradhātunānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the diversity of elements. And what is the
diversity of elements? The sight element, the sound element, the smell
element, the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element.
This is called the diversity of elements."

### N 14.7 Diversity of Perceptions *Saññānānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of
perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of
thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires.
Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of
passions gives rise to diversity of searches. And what is the diversity
of elements? The sight element, the sound element, the smell element,
the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element. This is
called the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of
perceptions, and diversity of perceptions give rise to diversity of
thoughts, and diversity of thoughts give rise to diversity of desires,
and diversity of desires give rise to diversity of passions, and
diversity of passions give rise to diversity of searches?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception
of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights
give rise to the desire for sights. The desire for sights gives rise to
the passion for sights. The passion for sights gives rise to searching
for sights. ... The idea element gives rise to the perception of ideas.
The perception of ideas gives rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts
about ideas give rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas
gives rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas gives rise to
searching for ideas.

That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions,
and diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts, and
diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires, and diversity
of desires gives rise to diversity of passions, and diversity of
passions gives rise to diversity of searches."

### N 14.8 No Diversity of Searches *Nopariyesanānānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of
perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of
thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires.
Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of
passions gives rise to diversity of searches. Diversity of searches
doesn't give rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions
doesn't give rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires doesn't
give rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts doesn't give
rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions doesn't give
rise to diversity of elements. And what is the diversity of elements?
The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste
element, the touch element, and the idea element. This is called the
diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions
... diversity of perceptions doesn't give rise to diversity of elements?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights ... The idea
element gives rise to the perception of ideas ... the search for ideas.
The search for ideas doesn't give rise to the passion for ideas. The
passion for ideas doesn't give rise to the desire for ideas. The desire
for ideas doesn't give rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts about
ideas don't give rise to perceptions of ideas. Perceptions of ideas
don't give rise to the idea element.

That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions
... diversity of perceptions doesn't give rise to diversity of
elements."

### N 14.9 Diversity of Gains *Bāhiraphassanānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of
perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of
thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of contacts.
Diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of
feelings gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives
rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to
diversity of searches. Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of
gains. And what is the diversity of elements? The sight element, the
sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element,
and the idea element. This is called the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions
... diversity of searches give rise to diversity of gains?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception
of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights
give rise to sight contact. Sight contact gives rise to feeling born of
sight contact. Feeling born of sight contact gives rise to the desire
for sights. The desire for sights gives rise to the passion for sights.
The passion for sights gives rise to searching for sights. Searching for
sights gives rise to gaining sights ... The idea element gives rise to
the perception of ideas. The perception of ideas gives rise to thoughts
about ideas. Thoughts about ideas give rise to idea contact. Idea
contact gives rise to feeling born of idea contact. Feeling born of idea
contact gives rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas gives
rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas gives rise to
searching for ideas. Searching for ideas gives rise to gaining ideas.

That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions
... diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains."

### N 14.10 No Diversity of Gains *Dutiyabāhiraphassanānattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of
perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of
thoughts. ... contacts ... feelings ... desires ... passions ...
Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains. Diversity of
gains doesn't give rise to diversity of searches. Diversity of searches
doesn't give rise to diversity of passions. ... desires ... feelings ...
contacts ... thoughts ... Diversity of perceptions doesn't give rise to
diversity of elements. And what is the diversity of elements? The sight
element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the
touch element, and the idea element. This is called the diversity of
elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of
perceptions, and diversity of perceptions give rise to diversity of
thoughts? contacts ... feelings ... desires ... passions ... searches
... gains ... while diversity of gains doesn't give rise to diversity of
searches ... passions ... desires ... feelings ... contacts ... thoughts
... perceptions ... elements?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights ... The idea
element gives rise to the perception of ideas ... The search for ideas
gives rise to gaining ideas. The gaining of ideas doesn't give rise to
the search for ideas. The search for ideas doesn't give rise to the
passion for ideas. The passion for ideas doesn't give rise to the desire
for ideas. The desire for ideas doesn't give rise to feeling born of
idea contact. Feeling born of idea contact doesn't give rise to idea
contact. Idea contact doesn't give rise to thoughts about ideas.
Thoughts about ideas don't give rise to perceptions of ideas.
Perceptions of ideas don't give rise to the idea element.

That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions
... diversity of perceptions doesn't give rise to diversity of
elements."

## Chapter Two

### N 14.11 Seven Elements *Sattadhātusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these seven elements. What seven? The element of
light, the element of beauty, the element of the dimension of infinite
space, the element of the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
element of the dimension of nothingness, the element of the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, and the element of the cessation
of perception and feeling. These are the seven elements."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "Sir, due to
what does each of these elements appear?"

"Mendicant, the element of light appears due to the element of darkness.
The element of beauty appears due to the element of ugliness. The
element of the dimension of infinite space appears due to the element of
form. The element of the dimension of infinite consciousness appears due
to the element of the dimension of infinite space. The element of the
dimension of nothingness appears due to the element of the dimension of
infinite consciousness. The element of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception appears due to the element of the
dimension of nothingness. The element of the cessation of perception and
feeling appears due to the element of cessation."

"Sir, how is each of these elements to be attained?"

"The elements of light, beauty, the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness, and the dimension of nothingness
are attainments with perception. The element of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception is an attainment with only a residue of
conditioned phenomena. The element of the cessation of perception and
feeling is an attainment of cessation."

### N 14.12 With a Cause *Sanidānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts arise for a reason,
not without reason.

And how do sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts arise for a reason,
not without reason? The element of sensuality gives rise to sensual
perceptions. Sensual perceptions give rise to sensual thoughts. Sensual
thoughts give rise to sensual desires. Sensual desires give rise to
sensual passions. Sensual passions give rise to searches for sensual
pleasures. An unlearned ordinary person on a search for sensual
pleasures behaves badly in three ways: by body, speech, and mind.

The element of malice gives rise to malicious perceptions. Malicious
perceptions give rise to malicious thoughts. ... malicious desires ...
malicious passions ... malicious searches ... An unlearned ordinary
person on a malicious search behaves badly in three ways: by body,
speech, and mind.

The element of cruelty gives rise to cruel perceptions. Cruel
perceptions give rise to cruel thoughts. ... cruel desires ... cruel
passions ... cruel searches ... An unlearned ordinary person on a cruel
search behaves badly in three ways: by body, speech, and mind.

Suppose a person was to drop a burning torch in a thicket of dry grass.
If they don't quickly extinguish it with their hands and feet, the
creatures living in the grass and wood would come to ruin.

In the same way, a corrupt perception might arise in an ascetic or
brahmin. If they don't quickly give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it,
and obliterate it, they'll suffer in the present life, with distress,
anguish, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect to be reborn in a bad place.

Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness arise for a
reason, not without reason.

And how do thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness arise
for a reason, not without reason? The element of renunciation gives rise
to perceptions of renunciation. Perceptions of renunciation give rise to
thoughts of renunciation. Thoughts of renunciation give rise to
enthusiasm for renunciation. Enthusiasm for renunciation gives rise to
fervor for renunciation. Fervor for renunciation gives rise to the
search for renunciation. A learned noble disciple on a search for
renunciation behaves well in three ways: by body, speech, and mind.

The element of good will gives rise to perceptions of good will.
Perceptions of good will give rise to thoughts of good will. ...
enthusiasm for good will ... fervor for good will ... the search for
good will. A learned noble disciple on a search for good will behaves
well in three ways: by body, speech, and mind.

The element of harmlessness gives rise to perceptions of harmlessness.
Perceptions of harmlessness give rise to thoughts of harmlessness. ...
enthusiasm for harmlessness ... fervor for harmlessness ... the search
for harmlessness. A learned noble disciple on a search for harmlessness
behaves well in three ways: by body, speech, and mind.

Suppose a person was to drop a burning torch in a thicket of dry grass.
If they were to quickly extinguish it with their hands and feet, the
creatures living in the grass and wood wouldn't come to ruin.

In the same way, a corrupt perception might arise in an ascetic or
brahmin. If they quickly give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and
obliterate it, they'll be happy in the present life, free of distress,
anguish, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect to be reborn in a good place."

### N 14.13 In the Brick Hall *Giñjakāvasathasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, an element gives rise to a perception, a view, and a
thought."

When he said this, Venerable Kaccāna said to the Buddha,
"Sir, regarding those who are not fully awakened Buddhas, there is a
view that they are in fact fully awakened Buddhas. Due to what does this
view appear?"

"It's a mighty thing, Kaccāna, the element of ignorance. An
inferior element gives rise to inferior perceptions, inferior views,
inferior thoughts, inferior intentions, inferior aims, inferior wishes,
an inferior person, and inferior speech. One explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the inferior. I say that
their rebirth is inferior.

A middling element gives rise to middling perceptions, middling views,
middling thoughts, middling intentions, middling aims, middling wishes,
a middling person, and middling speech. One explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the middling. I say that
their rebirth is middling.

A superior element gives rise to superior perceptions, superior views,
superior thoughts, superior intentions, superior aims, superior wishes,
a superior person, and superior speech. One explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals the superior. I say that
their rebirth is superior."

### N 14.14 Bad Convictions *Hīnādhimuttikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element. Those who have bad convictions come together and converge with
those who have bad convictions. Those who have good convictions come
together and converge with those who have good convictions.

In the past, too, sentient beings came together and converged because of
an element. ...

In the future, too, sentient beings will come together and converge
because of an element. ...

At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of
an element. Those who have bad convictions come together and converge
with those who have bad convictions. Those who have good convictions
come together and converge with those who have good convictions."

### N 14.15 Walking Together *Caṅkamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. Now at that time Venerable
Sāriputta was walking together with several mendicants not
far from the Buddha. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was doing
likewise, as were Venerable Mahākassapa, Venerable
Anuruddha, Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī,
Venerable Upāli, Venerable Ānanda, and Devadatta.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you see
Sāriputta walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants have great wisdom. Do you see
Moggallāna walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants have great psychic power. Do you see Kassapa
walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants advocate austerities. Do you see Anuruddha
walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants have clairvoyance. Do you see
Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī walking together with
several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants are Dhamma speakers. Do you see
Upāli walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants are experts in monastic law. Do you see Ānanda
walking together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants are very learned. Do you see Devadatta walking
together with several mendicants?"

"Yes, sir."

"All of those mendicants have corrupt wishes.

Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those
who have bad convictions come together and converge with those who have
bad convictions. Those who have good convictions come together and
converge with those who have good convictions.

In the past, in the future, and also in the present, sentient beings
come together and converge because of an element. Those who have bad
convictions come together and converge with those who have bad
convictions. Those who have good convictions come together and converge
with those who have good convictions."

### N 14.16 With Verses *Sagāthāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element. Those who have bad convictions come together and converge with
those who have bad convictions. In the past ...

In the future ...

At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of
an element. Those who have bad convictions come together and converge
with those who have bad convictions.

It's like how dung comes together with dung, urine with urine, spit with
spit, pus with pus, and blood with blood. In the same way, sentient
beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have
bad convictions come together and converge with those who have bad
convictions. In the past ... In the future ... At present, too, sentient
beings come together and converge because of an element. Those who have
bad convictions come together and converge with those who have bad
convictions.

Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those
who have good convictions come together and converge with those who have
good convictions. In the past ...

In the future ... At present, too, sentient beings come together and
converge because of an element. Those who have good convictions come
together and converge with those who have good convictions.

It's like how milk comes together with milk, oil with oil, ghee with
ghee, honey with honey, and molasses with molasses. In the same way,
sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those
who have good convictions come together and converge with those who have
good convictions. In the past ... In the future ... At present, too,
sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. Those
who have good convictions come together and converge with those who have
good convictions."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Socializing promotes entanglement;\
> they're cut off by being aloof.\
> If you're lost in the middle of a great sea,\
> and you clamber up on a little log, you'll sink.
>
> So too, a person who lives well\
> sinks by relying on a lazy person.\
> Hence you should avoid such\
> a lazy person who lacks energy.
>
> Dwell with the noble ones\
> who are secluded and determined\
> and always energetic;\
> the astute who practice absorption."

### N 14.17 Faithless *Assaddhasaṁsandanasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the faithless with the faithless, the unconscientious with the
unconscientious, the imprudent with the imprudent, the unlearned with
the unlearned, the lazy with the lazy, the unmindful with the unmindful,
and the witless with the witless.

In the past, too, sentient beings came together and converged because of
an element. ...

In the future, too, sentient beings will come together and converge
because of an element. ...

At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of
an element. ...

Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: the
faithful with the faithful, the conscientious with the conscientious,
the prudent with the prudent, the learned with the learned, the
energetic with the energetic, the mindful with the mindful, and the wise
with the wise. In the past ... In the future ... At present, too,
sentient beings come together and converge because of an element. ..."

### N 14.18 Beginning With the Faithless *Assaddhamūlakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the faithless with the faithless, the unconscientious with the
unconscientious, the witless with the witless, the faithful with the
faithful, the conscientious with the conscientious, and the wise with
the wise. In the past ... In the future ...

At present, too, sentient beings come together and converge because of
an element. ...

Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element: the
faithless with the faithless, the imprudent with the imprudent, the
witless with the witless, the faithful with the faithful, the prudent
with the prudent, and the wise with the wise.

**(The following should be told in full like the first section.)**

Sentient beings come together because of an element: the faithless ...
unlearned ... witless ... the faithful ...

Sentient beings come together because of an element: the faithless ...
lazy ... witless. the faithful ... energetic ... wise.

Sentient beings come together because of an element: the faithless ...
unmindful ... witless. the faithful ... mindful ... wise."

### N 14.19 Beginning With the Shameless *Ahirikamūlakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the unconscientious with the unconscientious ... imprudent ...
witless. The conscientious with the conscientious ... prudent ... wise.

... shameless ... unlearned ... witless. The conscientious with the
conscientious ... learned ... wise.

... shameless ... lazy ... witless. The conscientious with the
conscientious ... energetic ... wise.

... shameless ... unmindful ... witless. The conscientious with the
conscientious ... mindful ... wise."

### N 14.20 Beginning With Imprudence *Anottappamūlakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the imprudent with the imprudent ... unlearned ... witless. The
prudent with the prudent ... learned ... wise.

... the imprudent with the imprudent ... lazy ... witless. The prudent
with the prudent ... energetic ... wise.

... the imprudent with the imprudent ... unmindful ... witless. The
prudent with the prudent ... mindful ... wise."

### N 14.21 Beginning With the Unlearned *Appassutamūlakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the unlearned with the unlearned ... lazy ... witless. The
learned with the learned ... energetic ... wise.

... the unlearned with the unlearned ... unmindful ... witless. The
learned with the learned ... mindful ... wise."

### N 14.22 Beginning With the Lazy *Kusītamūlakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the lazy with the lazy ... unmindful ... witless ... energetic
... mindful ... wise ..."

**(Tell all in full for the past, future, and present.)**

## The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds

### N 14.23 Lacking Immersion *Asamāhitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the faithless with the faithless ... shameless ... imprudent
... lacking immersion ... witless ...

The faithful with the faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ...
possessing immersion ... and the wise with the wise."

### N 14.24 Unethical *Dussīlasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: the faithless with the faithless ... shameless ... imprudent
... unethical ... witless ...

The faithful with the faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ... ethical
... and the wise with the wise."

### N 14.25 The Five Precepts *Pañcasikkhāpadasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: those who kill living creatures with those who kill living
creatures, those who steal ... commit sexual misconduct ... lie ...
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants ...

Those who refrain from killing living creatures ... who refrain from
stealing ... who refrain from sexual misconduct ... who refrain from
lying ... those who refrain from consuming beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants with those who refrain from consuming beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants."

### N 14.26 Seven Ways of Performing Deeds *Sattakammapathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: those who kill living creatures with those who kill living
creatures, those who steal ... commit sexual misconduct ... lie ...
speak divisively ... speak harshly ... talk nonsense ...

Those who refrain from killing living creatures. ... who refrain from
stealing ... who refrain from sexual misconduct ... who refrain from
lying ... who refrain from divisive speech ... who refrain from harsh
speech ... who refrain from talking nonsense with those who refrain from
talking nonsense."

### N 14.27 Ten Ways of Performing Deeds *Dasakammapathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: those who kill living creatures with those who kill living
creatures, those who steal ... commit sexual misconduct ... lie ...
speak divisively ... speak harshly ... talk nonsense ... are covetous
... are malicious ... have wrong view ...

Those who refrain from killing living creatures ... who refrain from
stealing ... who refrain from sexual misconduct ... who refrain from
lying ... who refrain from divisive speech ... who refrain from harsh
speech ... who refrain from talking nonsense ... are not covetous ...
are not malicious ... have right view with those who have right view."

### N 14.28 The Eightfold Path *Aṭṭhaṅgikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: those of wrong view with those of wrong view ... wrong thought
... wrong speech ... wrong action ... wrong livelihood ... wrong effort
... wrong mindfulness ... wrong immersion ...

Those who have right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion with those who have right immersion."

### N 14.29 Ten Factored Path *Dasaṅgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sentient beings come together and converge because of an
element: those of wrong view with those of wrong view ... wrong thought
... wrong speech ... wrong action ... wrong livelihood ... wrong effort
... wrong mindfulness ... wrong immersion ... wrong knowledge ... wrong
freedom ...

Those who have right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion ... right knowledge ... right freedom with those who
have right freedom."

**(Tell all in full for the past, future, and present.)**

## Chapter Four

### N 14.30 Four Elements *Catudhātusutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. ... "Mendicants, there
are these four elements. What four? The elements of earth, water, fire,
and air. These are the four elements."

### N 14.31 Before Awakening *Pubbesambodhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification, the
drawback, and the escape when it comes to the earth element ... the
water element ... the fire element ... and the air element?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from the
earth element: this is its gratification. That the earth element is
impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing
and giving up desire and greed for the earth element: this is its
escape. The pleasure and happiness that arise from the water element ...
The pleasure and happiness that arise from the fire element ... The
pleasure and happiness that arise from the air element: this is its
gratification. That the air element is impermanent, suffering, and
perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and
greed for the air element: this is its escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand these four elements' gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn't announce my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these four elements' gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I announced my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 14.32 In Search of Gratification *Acariṁsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I went in search of the earth element's gratification, and
I found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of
gratification in the earth element. I went in search of the earth
element's drawback, and I found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the
full extent of the drawback in the earth element. I went in search of
escape from the earth element, and I found it. I've seen clearly with
wisdom the full extent of escape from the earth element.

I went in search of the water element's gratification ... I went in
search of the fire element's gratification ... I went in search of the
air element's gratification ...

As long as I didn't truly understand these four elements' gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce my supreme
perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

But when I did truly understand the four elements' gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 14.33 If There Was No *Nocedaṁsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the earth element,
sentient beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But since there is
gratification in the earth element, sentient beings are aroused by it.
If the earth element had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But since the earth element has a drawback,
sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. If there were no escape
from the earth element, sentient beings wouldn't escape from it. But
since there is an escape from the earth element, sentient beings do
escape from it.

If there were no gratification in the water element ... If there were no
gratification in the fire element ... If there were no gratification in
the air element ...

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand these four elements'
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven't
escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they don't live detached, liberated, with a mind free of
limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand these four elements'
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they've escaped
from this world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits."

### N 14.34 Exclusively Painful *Ekantadukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if the earth element were exclusively painful---soaked and
steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings wouldn't
be aroused by it. But because the earth element is pleasurable---soaked
and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain---sentient beings are
aroused by it.

If the water element ... If the fire element ... If the air element ...

If the earth element was perfectly pleasurable---soaked and steeped in
pleasure and not steeped in pain---sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But because the earth element is painful---soaked
and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings do
grow disillusioned with it.

If the water element ... If the fire element ... If the air element was
perfectly pleasurable---soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped
in pain---sentient beings wouldn't grow disillusioned with it. But
because the air element is painful---soaked and steeped in pain and not
steeped in pleasure---sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it."

### N 14.35 Taking Pleasure *Abhinandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if you take pleasure in the earth element, you take
pleasure in suffering. If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you're
not exempt from suffering. If you take pleasure in the water element ...
If you take pleasure in the fire element ... If you take pleasure in the
air element, you take pleasure in suffering. If you take pleasure in
suffering, I say you're not exempt from suffering.

If you don't take pleasure in the earth element, you don't take pleasure
in suffering. If you don't take pleasure in suffering, I say you're
exempt from suffering. If you don't take pleasure in the water element
... If you don't take pleasure in the fire element ... If you don't take
pleasure in the air element, you don't take pleasure in suffering. If
you don't take pleasure in suffering, I say you're exempt from
suffering."

### N 14.36 Arising *Uppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
the earth element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of
diseases, and the manifestation of old age and death. The arising,
continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the water element ... The
arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the fire element
... The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of the air
element is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of the earth element is the
cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old
age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of the water element
... The cessation, settling, and ending of the fire element ... The
cessation, settling, and ending of the air element is the cessation of
suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and
death."

### N 14.37 Ascetics and Brahmins *Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four elements. What four? The elements of
earth, water, fire, and air. There are ascetics and brahmins who don't
truly understand these four elements' gratification, drawback, and
escape. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand these four
elements' gratification, drawback, and escape. I deem them as true
ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an
ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight."

### N 14.38 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four elements. What four? The elements of
earth, water, fire, and air. There are ascetics and brahmins who don't
truly understand these four elements' origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape ...

**(Tell all in full.)**

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand these four
elements' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape ..."

### N 14.39 Ascetics and Brahmins (3rd) *Tatiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
earth element, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. They don't understand the water element ... fire element
... air element ... Those venerables don't realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it with their own
insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the earth element, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They do understand the water element ... the fire element ... the air
element ... Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight."



