# Linked Discourses on the Bases of Psychic Power

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter at the Cāpāla Shrine

### N 51.1 From the Near Shore *Apārasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they lead to going from the near shore to the far shore. What
four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to energy, and active effort.
They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. When these four
bases of psychic power are developed and cultivated they lead to going
from the near shore to the far shore."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.2 Missed Out *Viraddhasutta*

"Mendicants, whoever has missed out on the four bases of psychic power
has missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken the four bases of psychic power has undertaken
the noble path to the complete ending of suffering. What four? It's when
a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. Whoever has missed out on these four bases of psychic power has
missed out on the noble path to the complete ending of suffering.
Whoever has undertaken these four bases of psychic power has undertaken
the noble path to the complete ending of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.3 A Noble One *Ariyasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering. What four? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. When these four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they are noble and emancipating, and bring one who practices
them to the complete ending of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.4 Disillusionment *Nibbidāsutta*

"Mendicants, these four bases of psychic power, when developed and
cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment. What four? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. These four bases of psychic power, when developed and
cultivated, lead solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.5 Partly *Iddhipadesasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have partly
manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and cultivating the
four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the future
who will partly manifest psychic powers will do so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and
brahmins in the present who are partly manifesting psychic powers do so
by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past who have partly manifested psychic powers have done so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. All the
ascetics and brahmins in the future who will partly manifest psychic
powers will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of
psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are
partly manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating
these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.6 Completely *Samattasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past who have
completely manifested psychic powers have done so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All the ascetics and
brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic powers will
do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power. All
the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are completely manifesting
psychic powers do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of
psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past who have completely manifested psychic powers have done so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power. All the
ascetics and brahmins in the future who will completely manifest psychic
powers will do so by developing and cultivating these four bases of
psychic power. All the ascetics and brahmins in the present who are
completely manifesting psychic powers do so by developing and
cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.7 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, all the mendicants in the past ... future ... present who
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and who live having realized it with their own insight due to
the ending of defilements, do so by developing and cultivating the four
bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the mendicants in the past ...
future ... present who realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and who live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, do so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.8 Awakened *Buddhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
It is because he has developed and cultivated these four bases of
psychic power that the Realized One is called 'the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha'."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.9 Knowledge *Ñāṇasutta*

"Mendicants: 'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort.' Such was the vision, knowledge,
wisdom, realization, and light that arose in me regarding teachings not
learned before from another. 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy,
and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ...
should be developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been
developed.' Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and
light that arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from
another.

'This is the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry,
and active effort.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... should be
developed.' ... 'This basis of psychic power ... has been developed.'
Such was the vision, knowledge, wisdom, realization, and light that
arose in me regarding teachings not learned before from another."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.10 At the Cāpāla Shrine *Cetiyasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof. Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, get your
sitting cloth. Let's go to the Cāpāla Shrine for the day's
meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla Shrine, and sat down
on the seat spread out. Ānanda bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

For a second time ... and for a third time, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

Then the Buddha said to him, "Go now, Ānanda, at your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked
went up to the Buddha and said to him:

"Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha. Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall
not be fully extinguished until I have monk disciples who are competent,
educated, assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice
in line with the teachings. Not until they practice properly, living in
line with the teaching. Not until they've learned their own tradition,
and explain, teach, assert, establish, disclose, analyze, and make it
clear. Not until they can legitimately and completely refute the
doctrines of others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.'

Today you do have such monk disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...' ...

Today you do have such nun disciples. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have layman disciples ... and laywoman disciples
who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ...

Today you do have such layman and laywoman disciples. May the Blessed
One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully
extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until my spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans.' Today your spiritual path is successful and
prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever
there are gods and humans. May the Blessed One now be fully
extinguished! May the Holy One now be fully extinguished! Now is the
time for the full extinguishment of the Buddha."

When this was said, the Buddha said to Māra, "Relax, Wicked
One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be soon. Three
months from now the Realized One will be fully extinguished."

So at the Cāpāla Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware,
surrendered the life force. When he did so there was a great earthquake,
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky. Then,
understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this
heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable\
> － with the creation of prolonged life,\
> the sage surrendered the life force.\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Shaking the Stilt Longhouse

### N 51.11 Before *Pubbasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the cause, what's the reason
for the development of the bases of psychic power?' Then it occurred to
me: 'It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: "My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they
develop a mind that's full of radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: "My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.'

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful; controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they understand the minds of other beings and individuals,
having comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with
greed as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without
greed'. They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind
with delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ...
scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is
not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two,
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see
sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how
sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. 'These dear beings
did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the
noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong
view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however,
did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced
the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that
right view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.12 Very Fruitful *Mahapphalasutta*

"Mendicants, when the four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they're very fruitful and beneficial. How so? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: 'My enthusiasm won't be too
lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted internally nor
scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving before and behind:
as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so above; as
above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance. When the four bases of psychic power have been
developed and cultivated in this way they're very fruitful and
beneficial.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. ...

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.13 Immersion Due to Enthusiasm *Chandasamādhisutta*

"Mendicants, if a mendicant depends on enthusiasm in order to gain
immersion, gain unification of mind, this is called immersion due to
enthusiasm. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have
arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development. These are called active efforts. And so there is this
enthusiasm, this immersion due to enthusiasm, and these active efforts.
This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort.

If a mendicant depends on energy in order to gain immersion, gain
unification of mind, this is called immersion due to energy. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are fulfilled by development. These are called active efforts. And
so there is this energy, this immersion due to energy, and these active
efforts. This is called the basis of psychic power that has immersion
due to energy, and active effort.

If a mendicant depends on mental development in order to gain immersion,
gain unification of mind, this is called immersion due to mental
development. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so
that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but
increase, mature, and are fulfilled by development. These are called
active efforts. And so there is this mental development, this immersion
due to mental development, and these active efforts. This is called the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and
active effort.

If a mendicant depends on inquiry in order to gain immersion, gain
unification of mind, this is called immersion due to inquiry. They
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise ... so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are fulfilled by development. These are called active efforts. And
so there is this inquiry, this immersion due to inquiry, and these
active efforts. This is called the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.14 With Moggallāna *Moggallānasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. Now at that time several mendicants
were staying beneath the longhouse. They were restless, insolent,
fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational
awareness and immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined
faculties.

Then the Buddha addressed Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, "These
spiritual companions of yours staying beneath the longhouse are
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful,
lacking situational awareness and immersion, with wandering mind and
undisciplined faculties. Go, Moggallāna, and strike awe in
those mendicants!"

"Yes, sir," replied Mahāmoggallāna. Then he used his
psychic power to make the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his
big toe. Then those mendicants stood to one side, shocked and awestruck.

"Oh lord, how incredible, how amazing! There's no wind at all; and this
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother has deep foundations.
It's firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes
and rocks and trembles!"

Then the Buddha went up to those mendicants and said:

"Why do you, mendicants, stand to one side, shocked and awestruck?"

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! There's no wind at all; and this
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother has deep foundations.
It's firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. And yet it shakes
and rocks and trembles!"

"Wanting to strike awe in you, the mendicant Moggallāna
made the longhouse shake and rock and tremble with his big toe.

What do you think, mendicants? What things has the mendicant
Moggallāna developed and cultivated so as to have such
power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen. The mendicant Moggallāna
has become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating the four
bases of psychic power. What four? Moggallāna develops the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates perceiving before
and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so
above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind
that's full of radiance. The mendicant Moggallāna has
become so powerful and mighty by developing and cultivating these four
bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic power
... controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. ...

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.15 The Brahmin Uṇṇābha *Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Then
Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to Venerable Ānanda, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to him, "Worthy Ānanda,
what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic
Gotama?"

"The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha, brahmin, is
to give up desire."

"But is there a path and a practice for giving up that desire?"

"There is."

"What is that path?"

"It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. This is the path and the practice for giving
up that desire."

"This being the case, worthy Ānanda, the path is endless, not finite.
For it's not possible to give up desire by means of desire."

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? Have you ever had a
desire to walk to the park, but when you arrived at the park, the
corresponding desire faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever had the energy to walk to the park, but when you arrived
at the park, the corresponding energy faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever had the idea to walk to the park, but when you arrived at
the park, the corresponding idea faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you ever inquired regarding a walk to the park, but when you
arrived at the park, the corresponding inquiry faded away?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, take a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements
ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended
the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed through
enlightenment. They formerly had the desire to attain perfection, but
when they attained perfection the corresponding desire faded away. They
formerly had the energy to attain perfection, but when they attained
perfection the corresponding energy faded away. They formerly had the
idea to attain perfection, but when they attained perfection the
corresponding idea faded away. They formerly inquired regarding
attaining perfection, but when they attained perfection the
corresponding inquiry faded away. What do you think, brahmin? This being
the case, is the path endless or finite?"

"Clearly, worthy Ānanda, this being the case, the path is finite, not
endless. Excellent, worthy Ānanda! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, the worthy Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many
ways. I go for refuge to the worthy Gotama, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth, may the worthy
Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.16 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or
present who are mighty and powerful have become so by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. All the ascetics and brahmins in the
past, future, or present who are mighty and powerful have become so by
developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.17 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, all the ascetics and brahmins in the past, future, or
present who wield the various kinds of psychic power---multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful; controlling their body as far as the realm of
divinity---do so by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic
power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. Mendicants, all the ascetics and
brahmins in the past, future, or present who wield the many kinds of
psychic power---multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling their body as far as the realm of divinity---do so by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.18 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic
power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. By developing and cultivating these four
bases of psychic power, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.19 A Teaching on Psychic Power, Etc. *Iddhādidesanāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you psychic power, the bases of psychic power,
the development of the bases of psychic power, and the practice that
leads to the development of the bases of psychic power. Listen ...

And what is psychic power? It's when a mendicant wields the many kinds
of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called
psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.20 Analysis *Vibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, when the four bases of psychic power are developed and
cultivated they're very fruitful and beneficial.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that
has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they
develop a mind that's full of radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.

And what is enthusiasm that's too lax? It's when enthusiasm is combined
with laziness. This is called lax enthusiasm.

And what is enthusiasm that's too tense? It's when enthusiasm is
combined with restlessness. This is called tense enthusiasm.

And what is enthusiasm that's constricted internally? It's when
enthusiasm is combined with dullness and drowsiness. This is called
enthusiasm constricted internally.

And what is enthusiasm that's scattered externally? It's when enthusiasm
is frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. This is called enthusiasm scattered
externally.

And how does a mendicant meditate perceiving before and behind: as
before, so behind; as behind, so before? It's when the perception of
before and behind is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and
comprehended with wisdom by a mendicant. That's how a mendicant
meditates perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind,
so before.

And how does a mendicant meditate as below, so above; as above, so
below? It's when a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles
of the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and
full of many kinds of filth. 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' That's how a mendicant
meditates as below, so above; as above, so below.

And how does a mendicant meditate as by day, so by night; as by night,
so by day? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort, with the same
features, attributes, and signs by day as by night. And they develop it
with the same features, attributes, and signs by night as by day. That's
how a mendicant meditates as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day.

And how, with an open and unenveloped heart, does a mendicant develop a
mind that's full of radiance? It's when a mendicant has properly grasped
the perception of light, and has properly grasped the perception of day.
That's how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a mendicant develops a
mind that's full of radiance.

And what is energy that's too lax? ...

And what is mental development that's too lax? ...

And what is inquiry that's too lax? It's when inquiry is combined with
laziness. This is called lax inquiry.

And what is inquiry that's too tense? It's when inquiry is combined with
restlessness. This is called tense inquiry.

And what is inquiry that's constricted internally? It's when inquiry is
combined with dullness and drowsiness. This is called inquiry
constricted internally.

And what is inquiry that's scattered externally? It's when inquiry is
frequently scattered and diffused externally on account of the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. This is called inquiry scattered
externally. ... That's how, with an open and unenveloped heart, a
mendicant develops a mind that's full of radiance. When the four bases
of psychic power have been developed and cultivated in this way they're
very fruitful and beneficial.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. When the four bases of psychic power
have been developed and cultivated in this way, they realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Iron Ball

### N 51.21 The Path *Maggasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the path and practice for
developing the bases of psychic power?' Then it occurred to me: 'It's
when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion
due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They think: "My enthusiasm won't
be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted internally nor
scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving before and behind:
as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so above; as
above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance.

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. They think: "My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally." And they meditate perceiving
before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below,
so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind
that's full of radiance.'

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, a mendicant wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity.

When the four bases of psychic power have been developed and cultivated
in this way, they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements."

**(The six direct knowledges should be told in full.)**

<!--pg-->
### N 51.22 The Iron Ball *Ayoguḷasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, do you have personal experience of going to the realm of divinity
by psychic power with a mind-made body?"

"I do, Ānanda."

"But do you have personal experience of going to the realm of divinity
by psychic power with this body made up of the four principal states?"

"I do, Ānanda."

"It's incredible and amazing that the Buddha is capable of going to the
realm of divinity by psychic power with a mind-made body! And that he
has personal experience of going to the realm of divinity by psychic
power with this body made up of the four principal states!"

"Ānanda, the Realized Ones are incredible and have incredible qualities.
They're amazing and have amazing qualities.

Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body becomes lighter, softer,
more workable, and more radiant.

Suppose there was an iron ball that had been heated all day. It'd become
lighter, softer, more workable, and more radiant. In the same way,
sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body becomes lighter, softer,
more workable, and more radiant.

Sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his mind
in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss and
lightness in the body. At that time his body easily rises up from the
ground into the air. He wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity.

Suppose there was a light tuft of cotton-wool or kapok. Taken up by the
wind, it would easily rise up from the ground into the air. In the same
way, sometimes the Realized One submerges his body in his mind and his
mind in his body. He meditates after sinking into a perception of bliss
and lightness in the body. At that time his body easily rises up from
the ground into the air. He wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as
far as the realm of divinity."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.23 A Mendicant *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
By developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.24 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.25 Fruits (1st) *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power,
one of two results can be expected: enlightenment in this very life, or
if there's something left over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.26 Fruits (2nd) *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four bases of psychic power. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ...
inquiry, and active effort. These are the four bases of psychic power.
Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power,
seven fruits and benefits can be expected.

What seven? They attain enlightenment early on in this very life. If
not, they attain enlightenment at the time of death. If not, with the
ending of the five lower fetters, they're extinguished between one life
and the next ... they're extinguished upon landing ... they're
extinguished without extra effort ... they're extinguished with extra
effort ... they head upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha
realm. Because of developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic
power, these seven fruits and benefits can be expected."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.27 With Ānanda (1st) *Paṭhamaānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is
the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice
that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Ānanda, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.28 With Ānanda (2nd) *Dutiyaānandasutta*

The Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, what is psychic power?
What is the basis of psychic power? What is the development of the bases
of psychic power? And what is the practice that leads to the development
of the bases of psychic power?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"Ānanda, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the body
as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.29 Several Mendicants (1st) *Paṭhamabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power? What is
the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the practice
that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic
power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ... controlling the
body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.30 Several Mendicants (2nd) *Dutiyabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... The Buddha said to
them:

"Mendicants, what is psychic power? What is the basis of psychic power?
What is the development of the bases of psychic power? And what is the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"And what is psychic power? It's a mendicant who wields the many kinds
of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again ...
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. This is called
psychic power.

And what is the basis of psychic power? The path and practice that leads
to gaining psychic power. This is called the basis of psychic power.

And what is the development of the bases of psychic power? It's when a
mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm ... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active
effort. This is called the development of the bases of psychic power.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of the bases of
psychic power? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the development of the bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.31 About Moggallāna *Moggallānasutta*

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "What do you think,
mendicants? What things has the mendicant Moggallāna
developed and cultivated so as to have such power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
..."

"The mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty
by developing and cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? Moggallāna develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he
develops a mind that's full of radiance.

He develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' ... And so, with an open and
unenveloped heart, he develops a mind that's full of radiance. The
mendicant Moggallāna has become so powerful and mighty by
developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna wields the many kinds of psychic
power: multiplying himself and becoming one again ... controlling the
body as far as the realm of divinity.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
mendicant Moggallāna realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 51.32 The Realized One *Tathāgatasutta*

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "What do you think,
mendicants? What things has the Realized One developed and cultivated so
as to have such power and might?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"The Realized One has become so powerful and mighty by developing and
cultivating the four bases of psychic power.

What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
enthusiasm won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither
constricted internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates
perceiving before and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so
before; as below, so above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night;
as by night, so by day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he
develops a mind that's full of radiance.

He develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to energy
... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. He thinks: 'My
inquiry won't be too lax or too tense. And it'll be neither constricted
internally nor scattered externally.' And he meditates perceiving before
and behind: as before, so behind; as behind, so before; as below, so
above; as above, so below; as by day, so by night; as by night, so by
day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart, he develops a mind
that's full of radiance.

The Realized One has become so powerful and mighty by developing and
cultivating these four bases of psychic power.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
Realized One wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying himself
and becoming one again ... controlling the body as far as the realm of
divinity.

And by developing and cultivating these four bases of psychic power, the
Realized One realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And he lives having realized it with his own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

**(The six direct knowledges should be told in full.)**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### N 51.33--44 The Ganges River, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four bases
of psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

And how does a mendicant who develops the four bases of psychic power
slant, slope, and incline to extinguishment? It's when a mendicant
develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm
... energy ... mental development ... inquiry, and active effort.

That's how a mendicant who develops and cultivates the four bases of
psychic power slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Diligence

### N 51.45--54 Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Hard Work

### N 51.55--66 Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Searches

### N 51.67--76 Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Floods

### N 51.77--86 Floods, Etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The four bases of psychic power should be developed for the direct
knowledge, complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these
five higher fetters. What four? It's when a mendicant develops the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm ... energy ...
mental development ... inquiry, and active effort. These four bases of
psychic power should be developed for the direct knowledge, complete
understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher fetters."

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path at SN
45\.171--180.)*
:::

> ::: footnotesize
> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.
> :::


**The Linked Discourses on the Bases of psychic Power is the seventh section.**

