SUTTA 65

###### [^660]
This refers to the Buddha's practice of eating a single meal in the forenoon only. According to the Pātimokkha, the bhikkhus are prohibited from eating from noon until the following dawn, though the single-session practice is only recommended but not required.

###### [^661]
MA: He would be worried and anxious whether he could live the holy life for his entire life.

###### [^662]
His anxiety persisted because he would still have to finish his meal of the remains by noon.

###### [^663]
This is the rule prohibiting eating outside the proper time limits. See Vin Pāc 37/iv. 35.

###### [^664]
The seven terms used in this section represent a sevenfold classification of noble individuals. They are explicated at MN 70.14-21.

###### [^665]
Both Nm and Horner take sankameyya here to mean that the bhikkhu makes himself a plank, i.e., lies down across the mud. This, however, is contradicted by Bhaddāli's negative answer. Thus it would seem more correct to take this verb to mean that he crosses over himself (as the verb literally does mean), in disregard of the Buddha's injunction. MA points out that the Buddha would never give such a command to his disciples, but only says this to emphasise the recalcitrant behaviour of Bhaddāli.

###### [^666]
MA: He maintains himself by a measure of worldly faith and worldly love towards his preceptor and teacher. Because the other bhikkhus help him, he remains in the homeless life and may eventually become a great monk attained to the direct knowledges.

###### [^667]
This passage refers to the fixed principle that the Buddha does not lay down a training rule until a case arises that requires the promulgation of an appropriate training rule. See Vin Pār 1/iii.9-10.

###### [^668]
Tasmin thane parinibbāyati. The verb used here is the verbal form of parinibbana, and could be literally, though erroneously, translated, "He attains final Nibbāna in that action."

###### [^669]
"One beyond training" (asekha) is an arahant. MA explains these ten factors as constituents of the fruit of arahantship.

###### [^670]
Right knowledge (sammā ñāna) is the knowledge pertaining to the fruit of arahantship, right deliverance (samma vimutti) the arahant's liberation from all defilements.

