SUTTA 75

###### [^740]
Bhünahuno. In Ms, Nm had rendered this cryptic expression "a wrecker of being." I follow Horner in translating after the commentarial gloss hatavadḍhino mariyādakārakassa. MA explains that he held the view that "growth" should be accomplished in the six senses by experiencing whatever sense objects one has never experienced before without clinging to those that are already familiar. His view thus seems close to the contemporary attitude that intensity and variety of experience is the ultimate good and should be pursued without inhibitions or restrictions. The reason for his disapproval of the Buddha will become clear in §8.

###### [^741]
His father, the king, had provided him with three palaces and the entourage of women in hopes of keeping him confined to the lay life and distracting him from thoughts of renunciation.

###### [^742]
MA: This is said referring to the attainment of the fruit of arahantship based on the fourth jhāna.

###### [^743]
The expression viparītasaññā alludes to the "perverted perception" (saññāvipallāsa) of perceiving pleasure in what is really painful. MT says that sensual pleasures are painful because they arouse the painful defilements and because they yield painful fruits in the future. Horner misses' the point by translating the line "(they may) receive a change of sensation and think it pleasant" (MLS 2:187).

###### [^744]
Māgandiya evidently understands the verse in line with the fifty-eighth wrong view of the Brahmajāla Sutta: "When this self, furnished and supplied with the five strands of sense pleasures, revels in them - at this point the self attains supreme Nibbāna here and now" (DN 1.3.20/i.36).

###### [^745]
MA: The full verse had been recited by the previous Buddhas seated in the midst of their fourfold assemblies. The multitude learned it as "a verse concerned with the good." After the last Buddha passed away, it spread among the wanderers, who were able to preserve only the first two lines in their books.

###### [^746]
The emphatic yeva, "just," implies that he was clinging to material form, feeling, etc., misconceived to be "I," "mine," and "my self." With the arising of vision - a metaphorical expression for the path of stream-entry personality view is eradicated and he understands the aggregates to be mere empty phenomena devoid of the selfhood that he had earlier imputed to them.

###### [^747]
"These" refers to the five aggregates.

