SUTTA 82

###### [^796]
Because of his readiness to risk death in order to obtain his parents' permission to go forth, he was later declared by the Buddha the foremost of those gone forth in faith. His verses are at Thag 769-93.

###### [^797]
Although the stock phrase "before long" is used here, MA says that it took Ratṭhapala twelve years of striving to attain arahantship. This statement seems correct in view of the fact that on his return journey to his parents' home his father did not immediately recognise him.

###### [^798]
$\bar{A}$ bhidosikam kummāsam. Elsewhere $\bar{N} m$ translated kummāsa as "bread," but here it obviously means something of a semi-liquid nature. MA says it is made from barley (yava).

###### [^799]
MA explains that his father meant to say: "Ratṭhapala, my dear, there is our wealth - we cannot be called poor -
yet you sit in such a place eating old porridge!" However, the householder was afflicted with such sorrow that he was unable to complete his utterance.

###### [^800]
The verses obviously refer to his former wives, adorned in order to entice him back to the lay life. Strangely, no mention is made of the wives in the portion of the sutta conceived in his pre-ordination days.

###### [^801]
MA: Recalling the Elder, the king would speak praise of him in the midst of his army or his harem: "That young man has done a difficult thing - having abandoned great wealth, he went forth without turning back or looking aside."

###### [^802]
Upanīyati loko addhuvo. MA: It is swept away towards ageing and death.

###### [^803]
Attäno loko anabhissaro. MA: There is no one able to offer it shelter or to console it with a refuge. This statement, of course, does not deny a refuge from the world, which is just what the Dhamma offers.

###### [^804]
Assako loko sabbam pahāya gamanīyam.

###### [^805]
Uno loko atitto tanhädāso.

