SUTTA 89

###### [^835]
Dīgha Kārāyaṇa was the commander-in-chief of King Pasenadi's forces. He was the nephew of Bandhula, chief of the Mallas and a former friend of King Pasenadi, whom the king had killed together with his thirty-two sons through the treacherous contrivance of his corrupt ministers. Kārāyaṇa was in secret collusion with Prince Viḍūḍabha, Pasenadi's son, to help the latter usurp his father's throne.

###### [^836]
Three leagues (yojana) would be approximately twenty miles.

###### [^837]
MA says that he thought: "Previously, after conferring in private with the recluse Gotama, the king arrested my uncle and his thirty-two sons. Perhaps this time he will arrest me." The royal insignia entrusted to Dīgha
Kārāyaṇa also included the fan, parasol, and sandals. Dīgha Kārāyaṇa hurried back to the capital with the royal insignia and crowned Viḍūḍabha king.

###### [^838]
At MN 13.11 these quarrels are said to arise because of sensual pleasures.

###### [^839]
As at MN 77.6.

###### [^840]
As at MN 27.4-7.

###### [^841]
At the time of their deaths both were declared by the Buddha to be once-returners. See AN 6:44/iii. 348.

###### [^842]
This statement indicates that this sutta can be assigned to the last year of the Buddha's life.

###### [^843]
When King Pasenadi returned to the place where he had left Dīgha Kārāyaṇa, he found only a servant woman who reported the news to him. He then hurried on to Rāajagaha to enlist the aid of his nephew, King Ajātasattu. But since he arrived late, he found the city gates closed. Exhausted by the journey, he lay down in a hall outside the city and died during the night.

###### [^844]
MA: "Monuments to the Dhamma" means words expressing reverence to the Dhamma. Whenever reverence is shown towards any of the Three Jewels, it is also shown to the others.

