SUTTA 98

###### [^900]
The text of this sutta has not been included in the PTS ed. of the Majjhima Nikāya, for the same reason given in n.867. The bracketed page numbers refer to the Anderson-Smith ed. of Sn.

###### [^901]
Here the word "kamma" has to be understood as present action or deed, and not past action producing its present consequences.

###### [^902]
Sāmañña. MA: Among animals the diversity in the shape of their bodily parts is determined by their species (yoni), but that (species differentiation) is not found in the individual bodies of brahmins and other classes of humans. Such being the case, the distinction between brahmins, khattiyas, etc., is purely a verbal designation; it is spoken of as mere conventional expression.

###### [^903]
MA: Up to this point the Buddha has criticised the assertion of Bhāradvāja that birth makes one a brahmin. Now
he will uphold the assertion of Vāseṭtha that action makes one a brahmin. For the ancient brahmins and other wise ones in the world would not recognise the brahminhood of one defective in livelihood, virtue, and conduct.

###### [^904]
Bhovadi. Bho, "sir," was a mode of address used among the brahmins. From this point on the Buddha will identify the true brahmin with the arahant. Verses §27-54$ here are identical with Dhp 396-423, except for an additional couplet in Dhp 423.

###### [^905]
MA: By the present volitional action which accomplishes the work of farming, etc.

###### [^906]
With this verse the word "kamma" undergoes a shift in meaning signalled by the term "dependent origination." "Kamma" here no longer means simply present action determining one's social status, but action in the special sense of a force binding beings to the round of existence. This same line of thought becomes even clearer in the next verse.

###### [^907]
This verse and the following one again refer to the arahant. Here, however, the contrast is not between the arahant as the one made holy by his actions and the born brahmin unworthy of his designation, but between the arahant as the one liberated from the bondage of action and result and all other beings who remain tied by their actions to the wheel of birth and death.

