SUTTA 109

###### [^1036]
The fifteenth day of the fortnight. See n. 59 and n. 809.

###### [^1037]
MA explains that this bhikkhu was himself an arahant and the teacher of sixty other bhikkhus who lived with him in the forest, striving in meditation. With their teacher's guidance they had developed various insight knowledges but could not attain the paths and fruits. Therefore their teacher brought them to see the Buddha in the hope that he could guide them to the supramundane attainments. The teacher asks the questions, not because he has doubts, but in order to dispel the doubts of his disciples.

###### [^1038]
Chandamūlakā. MA glosses chanda by tanh $\bar{a}$, craving, which is the origin of the suffering comprised by the five aggregates.

###### [^1039]
As at MN 44.6.

###### [^1040]
In the material form aggregate each of the four great elements is a condition for the other three and for derived material form. Contact is a condition for each of the three middle aggregates, as it is said: "Contacted one feels, bhikkhus; contacted one perceives; contacted one wills" (SN 35:93/iv.68). MA explains that at the moment of conception, the material phenomena and the three mental aggregates that arise are the mentality-materiality that is a condition for the rebirth consciousness. During the course of life the physical sense faculties and the sense objects together with the three mental aggregates are the mentali-ty-materiality that is a condition for sense consciousness.

###### [^1041]
As at MN 44.7-8.

###### [^1042]
It seems that this bhikkhu had difficulty in understanding how kamma can produce results without a self to receive them.

###### [^1043]
The readings of this sentence are highly divergent in different editions. The same sutta appears at SN 22:82/ iii.104, and the reading there (patipuccha vinīta) seems preferable to the reading here (in the PTS ed., paticca vinīta; in the BBS ed., pativinitta). The translation here fol-
lows the Samyutta text. Nim's translation, based on the PTS Majjhima text, reads: "Now, bhikkhus, you have been trained by me in dependent [conditionality] in various instances." Neither version is idiomatic Pali, and the commentaries to both Nikāyas are silent.

###### [^1044]
MA: The sixty bhikkhus discarded their original meditation subjects and investigated a new subject (based on the Buddha's discourse, MT). Without breaking their posture, right in their seats they attained arahantship.

