SUTTA 111

###### [^1046]
Anupadadhammavipassanā. MA explains that he developed insight into states in successive order by way of the meditative attainments and the jhāna factors, as will be described. The two-week period referred to fell from the time of Ven. Sāriputta's ordination under the Buddha to his attainment of arahantship while listening to the Buddha explain the comprehension of feeling to Dighanakha (see MN 74.14).

###### [^1047]
The first five states in the list are the jhāna factors proper of the first jhāna; the following states are additional components each performing their individual functions within the jhāna. This minute analysis of mental states into their components anticipates the methodology of the Abhidhamma, and it is thus no coincidence that the name of Sāriputta is so closely linked with the emergente of the Abhidhamma literature.

###### [^1048]
All these terms signify the temporary suppression of the defilements by the power of the jhāna, not the full liberation from defilements through their eradication by the highest path, which Ven. Sāriputta had yet to attain.

###### [^1049]
The "escape beyond" (uttarim nissaranam) here is the next higher attainment, the second jhāna.

###### [^1050]
Reading with the BBS ed. passaddhattā cetaso anäbhogo. MA explains that the mental concern with pleasure,
which persists in the third jhāna, is now considered to be gross, and when it subsides there is "mental unconcern due to tranquillity." The PTS ed. reading, passi vedanā, is unintelligible and clearly an error.

###### [^1051]
This indirect introspective method must be used to contemplate the fourth immaterial attainment because this attainment, being extremely subtle, does not enter into the direct range of investigation for disciples. Only fully enlightened Buddhas are able to contemplate it directly.

###### [^1052]
MA offers this explanation of the passage, transmitted by "the elders of India": "The Elder Sāriputta cultivated serenity and insight in paired conjunction and realised the fruit of non-returning. Then he entered the attainment of cessation, and after emerging from it he attained arahantship."

###### [^1053]
Since there are no mental factors in the attainment of cessation, MA says that "these states" here must refer either to the states of material form that were occurring while he attained cessation, or to the mental factors of the preceding fourth immaterial attainment.

###### [^1054]
Note the realisation that there is "no escape beyond" the attainment of arahantship.

###### [^1055]
Vasippatto pāramipatto. See n.763.

