SUTTA 146

###### [^1318]
One of the eight important rules laid down by the Buddha when he established the Bhikkhuni Sangha stipulated that every fortnight the bhikkhunis should request the bhikkhus to send a bhikkhu for the purpose of giving them an exhortation. According to MA, in a previous life Ven. Nandaka had been a king and those bhikkhunis had been his concubines. He wanted to avoid his turn in advising the bhikkhunis because he thought that another bhikkhu possessing the knowledge of past lives, seeing him giving an exhortation surrounded by the bhikkhunis, would think that he still could not separate himself from his former concubines. But the Buddha saw that Nandaka's discourse to the bhikkhunis would benefit them and thus he requested him to instruct them.

###### [^1319]
MA: They have seen this with the wisdom of insight.

###### [^1320]
Tajjam tajjam paccayam paticca tajja tajja vedana uppajjanti. The coming together of the eye, forms, and eye-consciousness is eye-contact, and this is the primary condition for the arising of feeling born of eye-contact. With the cessation of the eye, one of the factors responsible for eye-con-
tact is removed. Thus eye-contact ceases, and with its cessation the feeling born of eye-contact also ceases.

###### [^1321]
MA: He undertakes this teaching on the enlightenment factors because wisdom is not able to cut away the defilements by itself, but only when accompanied by the other six enlightenment factors (wisdom being equivalent to the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor).

###### [^1322]
MA: She who was last in regard to good qualities had become a stream-enterer, but those whose intentions were to become once-returners, non-returners, and arahants each achieved the fulfilment of their intentions. Because of these results, the Buddha named Ven. Nandaka the foremost bhikkhu in instructing the bhikkhunis.

