# The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Monastic Law

### N 2.280--309 *Vinayapeyyālavagga*

280\. "For two reasons the Realized One laid down training rules for his
disciples.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha\.  ...
For keeping difficult persons in check and for the comfort of
good-hearted mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect this
life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ...
For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to
lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect this life and
protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For restraining
hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect
lives to come ... For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this
life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to
come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of
mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For inspiring confidence in those
without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it ... For the
continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. These
are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down training rules for
his disciples."

<!--pg-->
281--309\. "For two reasons the Realized One laid down for his disciples the
monastic code ... the recitation of the monastic code ... the suspension
of the recitation of the monastic code ... the invitation to admonish
... the setting aside of the invitation to admonish ... the disciplinary
act of condemnation ... placing under dependence ... banishment ...
reconciliation ... debarment ... probation ... being sent back to the
beginning ... penance ... reinstatement ... restoration ... removal ...
ordination ... an act with a motion ... an act with a motion and one
announcement ... an act with a motion and three announcements ... laying
down what was not previously laid down ... amending what was laid down
... the settling of a disciplinary matter by the following methods:
face-to-face ... through recollection ... because of past insanity ...
acting according to what has been admitted ... majority decision ...
further penalty... covering over as if with grass.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the Saṅgha\.  ...
For keeping difficult persons in check and for the comfort of
good-hearted mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect this
life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ...
For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to
lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect this life and
protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For restraining
hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect
lives to come ... For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this
life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to
come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of
mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For inspiring confidence in those
without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it ... For the
continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training.

These are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down the settlement
of a disciplinary matter by covering over with grass for his disciples."

