## The Chapter on the Peaceful Mind

### N 2.32--41 *Samacittavagga*

32\. "Mendicants, I will teach you the level of the untrue person and the
level of the true person. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

<!--pg-->
"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is the level of the untrue person? The untrue person is ungrateful
and thankless, for the wicked only know how to be ungrateful and
thankless. It is totally the level of an untrue person to be ungrateful
and thankless. The true person is grateful and thankful, for the
virtuous only know how to be grateful and thankful. It is totally the
level of a true person to be grateful and thankful."

33\. "Mendicants, I say that these two people cannot easily be repaid. What
two? Mother and father.

<!--pg-->
You would not have done enough to repay your mother and father even if
you were to carry your mother around on one shoulder and your father on
the other, and if you lived like this for a hundred years, and if you
were to anoint, massage, bathe, and rub them; and even if they were to
defecate and urinate right there.

Even if you were to establish your mother and father as supreme monarchs
of this great earth, abounding in the seven treasures, you would still
not have done enough to repay them. Why is that? Parents are very
helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them
the world.

But you have done enough, more than enough, to repay them if you
encourage, settle, and ground unfaithful parents in faith, unethical
parents in ethical conduct, stingy parents in generosity, or ignorant
parents in wisdom."

34\. Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha, "What does Mister Gotama teach?
What does he explain?"

<!--pg-->
"Brahmin, I teach action and inaction."

"But in what way does Mister Gotama teach action and inaction?"

"I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and
the many kinds of unskillful things. I teach action regarding good
bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of skillful
things. This is the kind of action and inaction that I teach."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

35\. Then the householder [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha, "How many in the
world are worthy of a religious donation? And where should a gift be
given?"

<!--pg-->
"Householder, there are two in the world who are worthy of a religious
donation: the trainee and the adept. These two in the world are worthy
of a religious donation, and that's where you should give a gift."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "In this world, the trainee and the adept,\
> are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.\
> They are sincere in body,\
> speech, and mind.\
> This is the field for sponsors of sacrifice---\
> what's given here is very fruitful."

36\. [So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery.

<!--pg-->
Now at that time Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s
mother in the Eastern Monastery. There [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} addressed
the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said this:

"I will teach you about a person fettered internally and one fettered
externally. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said this:

"Who is a person fettered internally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they
pass away from there, they're a returner, who comes back to this place.
This is called a person who is fettered internally, a returner, who
comes back to this place.

Who is a person fettered externally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. They enter and remain in
a certain peaceful state of freed mind. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they pass away
from there, they're a non-returner, not coming back to this place. This
is called a person who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does
not come back to this place.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical ... they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding sensual pleasures. They simply practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. They
practice for the ending of craving. They practice for the ending of
greed. When their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in one of
the orders of gods. When they pass away from there, they are
non-returners, not coming back to this place. This is called a person
who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not come back to
this place."

Then several peaceful-minded deities went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood
to one side, and said to the Buddha, "Sir, Venerable
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is
teaching the mendicants about a person with internal fetters and one
with external fetters. The assembly is overjoyed! Sir, please go to
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} out of sympathy." The Buddha consented
with silence.

Then the Buddha, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared in the stilt
longhouse of [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, in
front of [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. He sat on the seat spread out.
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to him:

"Just now, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, several peaceful-minded deities came
up to me, bowed, and stood to one side. Those deities said to me: 'Sir,
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is
teaching the mendicants about a person with internal fetters and one
with external fetters. The assembly is overjoyed! Sir, please go to
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} out of sympathy.'

Those deities, though they number ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or
sixty, can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against
each other.

[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, you might think: 'Surely those deities, since so
many of them can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up
against each other, must have developed their minds in that place.' But
you should not see it like this. It was right here that those deities
developed their minds.

So you should train like this: 'We shall have peaceful faculties and
peaceful minds.' That's how you should train. When your faculties and
mind are peaceful, your acts of body, speech, and mind will be peaceful,
thinking: 'We shall present the gift of peace to our spiritual
companions.' That's how you should train.

Those wanderers of other religions, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, who have not
heard this exposition of the teaching are lost."

37\. [So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time Venerable
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} was staying at [Varaṇā]{lang="sa"}, on the bank
of the Kaddama Lake.

<!--pg-->
Then the brahmin [Ārāmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} went up to
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}:

"What is the cause, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, what is the reason why
aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and
householders fight with householders?"

"It is because of their insistence on sensual desire, their shackles,
avarice, and attachment, that aristocrats fight with aristocrats,
brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders."

"What is the cause, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, what is the reason why
ascetics fight with ascetics?"

"It is because of their insistence on views, their shackles, avarice,
and attachment, that ascetics fight with ascetics."

"Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, is there anyone in the world who has gone
beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views?"

"There is, brahmin."

"Who in the world has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and
the insistence on views?"

"In the eastern lands there is a city called [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}.
There the Blessed One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. He, brahmin, has gone beyond the insistence on sensual
desire and the insistence on views."

When this was said, the brahmin [Ārāmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} got up from his
seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

He who has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the
insistence on views.

Excellent, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} has made the
teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth,
may Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life."

38\. At one time Venerable [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} was staying near
[Madhurā]{lang="sa"}, in Gunda's Grove.

<!--pg-->
Then the brahmin [Kandarāyana]{lang="sa"} went up to
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}, and exchanged greetings with him ... He sat
down to one side and said to [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}:

"I have heard, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, that the ascetic
[Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} doesn't bow to old brahmins, the elderly and
senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of
life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. And this
is indeed the case, for the ascetic [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} does not bow to
old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister
[Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}."

"There is the stage of an elder and the stage of youth as explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. If an elder, though eighty, ninety, or a hundred years
old, still dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as a child, not a senior. If a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life, does not dwell in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as astute, a senior."

When this was said, the brahmin [Kandarāyana]{lang="sa"} got up from his
seat, placed his robe over one shoulder, and bowed with his head at the
feet of the young mendicants, saying, "The good sirs are elders, at the
stage of the elder; we are youths, at the stage of youth.

Excellent, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}! ... From this day forth, may
Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} remember me as a lay follower who has gone
for refuge for life."

39\. "At a time when bandits are strong, kings are weak. Then the king is not
at ease when going out or coming back or when touring the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are not at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when bad mendicants are strong, good-hearted mendicants
are weak. Then the good-hearted mendicants continually adhere to silence
in the midst of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, or they stay in the
borderlands. This is for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans.

<!--pg-->
At a time when kings are strong, bandits are weak. Then the king is at
ease when going out or coming back or when inspecting the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when good-hearted mendicants are strong, bad mendicants
are weak. Then the bad mendicants continually adhere to silence in the
midst of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, or they leave for some place or other.
This is for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

40\. "Mendicants, I don't praise wrong practice for these two, for laypeople
and renunciates. Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor
renunciates succeed in completing the system of the skillful teaching.

<!--pg-->
I praise right practice for these two, for laypeople and renunciates.
Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in
completing the system of the skillful teaching."

41\. "Mendicants, by memorizing the discourses incorrectly, taking only a
semblance of the phrasing, some mendicants shut out the meaning and the
teaching. They act for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear.

<!--pg-->
But by memorizing the discourses well, not taking only a semblance of
the phrasing, some mendicants reinforce the meaning and the teaching.
They act for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people,
for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create
much merit and make the true teaching continue."

