# The Chapter on Assemblies

### N 2.42--51 *Parisavagga*

<!--pg-->
42\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A shallow
assembly and a deep assembly. And what is a shallow assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants are restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and
immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. This is
called a shallow assembly.

And what is a deep assembly? An assembly where the mendicants are not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but have
established mindfulness, situational awareness, immersion, unified
minds, and restrained faculties. This is called a deep assembly. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the deep
assembly."

<!--pg-->
43\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A divided
assembly and a harmonious assembly. And what is a divided assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants argue, quarrel, and dispute, continually
wounding each other with barbed words. This is called a divided
assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly. These are the two assemblies. The better
of these two assemblies is the harmonious assembly."

<!--pg-->
44\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the worst and an assembly of the best. And what is an assembly of the
worst? An assembly where the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack,
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. Those who come after follow their example. They too become
indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not
rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of the worst.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders;
instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after follow their example. They too are not indulgent or
slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in
seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of
the best. These are the two assemblies. The better of these two
assemblies is the assembly of the best."

<!--pg-->
45\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An ignoble
assembly and a noble assembly. And what is an ignoble assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants don't truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called an ignoble assembly.

And what is a noble assembly? An assembly where the mendicants truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called a noble assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
noble assembly."

<!--pg-->
46\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the dregs and an assembly of the cream. And what is an assembly of the
dregs? An assembly where the mendicants make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. This is called an
assembly of the dregs.

And what is an assembly of the cream? An assembly where the mendicants
make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and
cowardice. This is called an assembly of the cream. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the
cream."

<!--pg-->
47\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning, and an assembly educated in
questioning, not in fancy talk. And what is an assembly educated in
fancy talk, not in questioning? It is an assembly where, when discourses
spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited the mendicants do
want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand, and they
think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when
they've memorized those teachings they don't question or examine each
other, saying: 'Why does it say this? What does that mean?' So they
don't clarify what is unclear, or reveal what is obscure, or dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is called an assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning.

And what is an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk? It
is an assembly where, when discourses composed by poets---poetry, with
fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by
disciples---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses spoken
by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They
actively listen and try to understand, and they think those teachings
are worth learning and memorizing. And when they've memorized those
teachings they question and examine each other, saying: 'Why does it say
this? What does that mean?' So they clarify what is unclear, reveal what
is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This
is called an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk."

<!--pg-->
48\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly that
values things of the flesh, not the true teaching, and an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. And what is an
assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching? It is
an assembly where the mendicants praise each other in front of the
white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so is freed both
ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct witness;
so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is
a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is
ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.'
They thereby acquire material things. And when they get these things,
they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and
not understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that values
things of the flesh, not the true teaching.

And what is an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the
flesh? It is an assembly where the mendicants don't praise each other in
front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so
is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct
witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith;
so-and-so is a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith;
so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad
character.' They thereby acquire material things. And when they get
these things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh."

<!--pg-->
49\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unjust
assembly and a just assembly. And what is an unjust assembly? An
assembly where legal acts against the teaching proceed, while legal acts
in line with the teaching don't proceed. Legal acts against the training
proceed, while legal acts in line with the training don't proceed. Legal
acts against the teaching are explained, while legal acts in line with
the teaching aren't explained. Legal acts against the training are
explained, while legal acts in line with the training aren't explained.
This is called an unjust assembly.

And what is a just assembly? An assembly where legal acts in line with
the teaching proceed, while legal acts against the teaching don't
proceed. Legal acts in line with the training proceed, while legal acts
against the training don't proceed. Legal acts in line with the teaching
are explained, while legal acts against the teaching aren't explained.
Legal acts in line with the training are explained, while legal acts
against the training aren't explained. This is called a just assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
just assembly."

<!--pg-->
50\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unprincipled
assembly and a principled assembly ... The better of these two
assemblies is the principled assembly."

<!--pg-->
51\. "There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly with
unprincipled speech, and an assembly with principled speech. And what is
an assembly with unprincipled speech? It is an assembly where the
mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. But
they don't persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, nor
do they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Unable
to persuade or convince each other, they can't let go of their opinions.
They obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue, insisting that: 'This
is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is called an assembly
with unprincipled speech.

And what is an assembly with principled speech? It is an assembly where
the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not.
Then they persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, and
they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Since they
are able to persuade and convince each other, they let go of their
opinions. They don't obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue or
insist that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is
called an assembly with principled speech. These are the two assemblies.
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly with principled
speech."

