# The Chapter on Disciplinary Issues

### AN 2.11--20 *Adhikaraṇavagga*

<!--pg-->
11\. "There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? In this context, the
power of development is the power of the trainees. For when you rely on
the power of a trainee, you give up greed, hate, and delusion. Then you
don't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad. This is called
the power of development. These are the two powers."

<!--pg-->
12\. "There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a mendicant
develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity,
which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as
letting go. This is called the power of development. These are the two
powers."

<!--pg-->
13\. "There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. This is called the power of development. These are the
two powers."

<!--pg-->
14\. "Mendicants, the Realized One has two ways of teaching the Dhamma. What
two? In brief and in detail. These are the Realized One's two ways of
teaching the Dhamma."

<!--pg-->
15\. "Mendicants, in a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant
nor the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect
that issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants
won't live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the
offending mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves, you can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and
enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably.

And how, mendicants, does an offending mendicant carefully check
themselves? An offending mendicant reflects: 'I have committed a certain
unskillful offense with the body. That mendicant saw me do this. If I
hadn't committed that offense, they wouldn't have seen me. But since I
did commit that offense, they did see me. When they saw me, they were
upset, and they voiced their unhappiness to me. Then I also got upset,
so I told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone who owes
customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an offending
mendicant carefully checks themselves.

And how, mendicants, does an accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves? An accusing mendicant reflects: 'This mendicant has
committed a certain unskillful offense with the body. I saw them do
that. If they hadn't committed that offense, I wouldn't have seen them.
But since they did commit that offense, I did see them. When I saw them,
I was upset, and I voiced my unhappiness to them. Then they also got
upset, so they told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone
who owes customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves.

In a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant nor the
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that
issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants won't
live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the offending
mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you
can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the
mendicants will live comfortably."

<!--pg-->
16\. Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm?"

"Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he was righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha\. . From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
17\. Then the brahmin Jānussoṇi\.  went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"But what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm."

"I don't understand the meaning of what Mister Gotama has said in brief,
without explaining the details. Mister Gotama, please teach me this
matter in detail so I can understand the meaning."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Jānussoṇi replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, brahmin, someone has done bad things and not done good things
by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what they've
not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Furthermore, brahmin, someone has done good things and not done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what
they've not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
18\. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should
not do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should not be done, what
drawbacks should they expect?"

"They should expect these drawbacks. They blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people criticize them. They get a bad reputation.
They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These are the drawbacks they should expect."

"Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should be done, what
benefits should they expect?"

"They should expect these benefits. They don't blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people praise them. They get a good reputation.
They don't feel lost when they die. And when the body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the
benefits they should expect."

<!--pg-->
19\. "Mendicants, give up the unskillful. It is possible to give up the
unskillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Give up the
unskillful.' But it is possible, and so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'
And if giving up the unskillful led to harm and suffering, I would not
say: 'Give up the unskillful.' But giving up the unskillful leads to
welfare and happiness, so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'

Mendicants, develop the skillful. It is possible to develop the
skillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Develop the skillful.'
But it is possible, and so I say: 'Develop the skillful.' If developing
the skillful led to harm and suffering I wouldn't say: 'Develop the
skillful.' But developing the skillful leads to welfare and happiness,
so I say: 'Develop the skillful.'"

<!--pg-->
20\. "These two things, mendicants, lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are misplaced, and
the meaning is misinterpreted. When the words and phrases are misplaced,
the meaning is misinterpreted. These two things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are well organized,
and the meaning is correctly interpreted. When the words and phrases are
well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. These two things
lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

