## The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds

### N 3.163--182 Untitled Discourses on Three Qualities  *KammapathapeyyƒÅla*

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three? They
themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to kill living
creatures. And they approve of killing living creatures.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three? They
don't themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to not
kill living creatures. And they approve of not killing living creatures.
...

They themselves steal. They encourage others to steal. And they approve
of stealing. ...

They don't themselves steal. They encourage others to not steal. And
they approve of not stealing. ...

They themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of committing sexual
misconduct. ...

They don't themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
not commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of not committing sexual
misconduct. ...

They themselves lie. They encourage others to lie. And they approve of
lying. ...

They don't themselves lie. They encourage others to not lie. And they
approve of not lying. ...

They themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to speak
divisively. And they approve of speaking divisively. ...

They don't themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to not
speak divisively. And they approve of not speaking divisively. ...

They themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to speak harshly.
And they approve of speaking harshly. ...

They don't themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to not speak
harshly. And they approve of not speaking harshly. ...

They themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to talk nonsense.
And they approve of talking nonsense. ...

They don't themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to not talk
nonsense. And they approve of not talking nonsense. ...

They themselves are covetous. They encourage others to be covetous. And
they approve of covetousness. ...

They themselves are content. They encourage others to be contented. And
they approve of being contented. ...

They themselves have ill will. They encourage others to have ill will.
And they approve of having ill will. ...

They themselves are kind-hearted. They encourage others to be
kind-hearted. And they approve of kind-heartedness. ...

They themselves have wrong view. They encourage others to have wrong
view. And they approve of wrong view. ...

They themselves have right view. They encourage others to have right
view. And they approve of right view.

Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven."

