## The Chapter on Bound for Loss

### N 3.113 Bound for Loss  *Āpāyikasutta*

"Mendicants, these three are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault. What three?

Someone who is unchaste, but claims to be celibate; someone who makes a
groundless accusation of unchastity against a person whose celibacy is
pure; and someone who has the view, 'There is nothing wrong with sensual
pleasures,' so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures.

These are the three who are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault."

### N 3.114 Rare  *Dullabhasutta*

"Mendicants, the appearance of three people is rare in the world. What
three? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these three
people is rare in the world."

### N 3.115 Immeasurable  *Appameyyasutta*

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?
Someone easy to measure, someone hard to measure, and someone who is
immeasurable.

And who is the person easy to measure? It's a person who is restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties. This is called 'a person easy to measure'.

And who is the person hard to measure? It's a person who is not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued. They have
established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with
unified mind and restrained faculties. This is called 'a person hard to
measure'.

And who is the immeasurable person? It's a mendicant who is perfected,
and has ended defilements. This is called 'an immeasurable person'.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.116 Imperturbable  *Āneñjasutta*

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?

First, a person, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the
ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of infinite space. The lifespan of the gods of
infinite space is twenty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there
until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the
animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're
extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a learned
noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place
of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. They enjoy it and like it and find
it satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on
it often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company
of the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness. The lifespan of
the gods of infinite consciousness is forty thousand eons. An ordinary
person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they
go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the
Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then
they're extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a
learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their
place of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of nothingness. The lifespan of the gods of
nothingness is sixty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal
realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that
very life. This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and
an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.117 Failures and Accomplishments  *Vipattisampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view. And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills
living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure
in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.118 Unfailing Dice  *Apaṇṇakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. It's like
throwing unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same
way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of
failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. It's like throwing
unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same way,
some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics,
mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.119 Action  *Kammantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is failure in action? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in action'.

And what is failure in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has wrong
livelihood and earns a living by wrong livelihood. This is called
'failure in livelihood'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is accomplishment in action? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'accomplishment
in action'.

And what is accomplishment in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has
right livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called
'accomplishment in livelihood'.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'accomplishment in view'.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.120 Purity (1st)  *Paṭhamasoceyyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when someone doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. This is called 'purity of
body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when someone doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind? It's when someone is content, kind-hearted,
and has right view. This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity."

### N 3.121 Purity (2nd)  *Dutiyasoceyyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'purity of body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands 'I have
sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them, they
understand 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand how
sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up; and
how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have ill will in them they understand 'I have ill will in me';
and when they don't have ill will in them they understand 'I don't have
ill will in me'. They understand how ill will arises; how, when it's
already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't
arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them they understand 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me'; and when they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them they understand 'I don't have dullness and drowsiness
in me'. They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when
they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're given
up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have restlessness and remorse in them they understand 'I have
restlessness and remorse in me'; and when they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them they understand 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me'. They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them they understand 'I have doubt in me'; and
when they don't have doubt in them they understand 'I don't have doubt
in me'. They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity.

> Purity of body, purity of speech,\
> and undefiled purity of heart.\
> A pure person, blessed with purity,\
> has washed off all bad things, they say."

### N 3.122 Sagacity  *Moneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. What three?
Sagacity of body, speech, and mind.

And what is sagacity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'sagacity of body'.

And what is sagacity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'sagacity
of speech'.

And what is sagacity of mind? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is called 'sagacity of mind'. These are the three
kinds of sagacity.

> A sage in body, a sage in speech,\
> a sage undefiled in heart;\
> a sage, blessed with sagacity,\
> has given up everything, they say."

