# The Chapter on a Lump of Salt

### AN 3.92 Urgent  *Accāyikasutta*

"Mendicants, a farmer has three urgent duties. What three? A farmer
swiftly makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. Next they
swiftly plant seeds in season. When the time is right, they swiftly
irrigate or drain the field. These are the three urgent duties of a
farmer. That farmer has no special power or ability to say: 'Let the
crops germinate today! Let them flower tomorrow! Let them ripen the day
after!' But there comes a time when that farmer's crops germinate,
flower, and ripen as the seasons change.

In the same way, a mendicant has three urgent duties. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three urgent duties of a mendicant. That
mendicant has no special power or ability to say: 'Let my mind be freed
from defilements by not grasping today! Or tomorrow! Or the day after!'
But there comes a time---as that mendicant trains in the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom---that their mind is freed from
defilements by not grasping.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.93 Seclusion  *Pavivekasutta*

"Mendicants, wanderers of other religions advocate three kinds of
seclusion. What three? Seclusion in robes, almsfood, and lodgings.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in robes.
They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. This is what
wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in robes.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
almsfood. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. This is
what the wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
almsfood.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
lodgings. They stay in a wilderness, at the root of a tree, in a charnel
ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw, or a threshing-hut.
This is what wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
lodgings. These are the three kinds of seclusion that wanderers of other
religions advocate.

In this teaching and training, there are three kinds of seclusion for a
mendicant. What three? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, giving up
unethical conduct, being secluded from it. They have right view, giving
up wrong view, being secluded from it. They've ended defilements, giving
up defilements, being secluded from them. When a mendicant has these
three kinds of seclusion, they're called a mendicant who has reached the
peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core.

When a farmer's rice field is ripe, they'd have the rice cut swiftly,
gathered swiftly, transported swiftly, made into heaps swiftly, threshed
swiftly, the straw removed swiftly, winnowed swiftly, brought over
swiftly, pounded swiftly, and have the husks removed swiftly. In this
way that farmer's crop would reach the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core.

In the same way, when a mendicant is ethical, giving up unethical
conduct, being secluded from it; when they have right view, giving up
wrong view, being secluded from it; when they've ended defilements,
giving up defilements, being secluded from them: they're called a
mendicant who has reached the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.94 Autumn  *Saradasutta*

"In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates.

In the same way, when the stainless, immaculate vision of the teaching
arises in a noble disciple, three fetters are given up: substantialist
view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances.

Afterwards they get rid of two things: covetousness and ill will. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. If that noble disciple passed away at that time, they're
bound by no fetter that might return them to this world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.95 Assemblies  *Parisāsutta*

"Mendicants, these are the three assemblies. What three? An assembly of
the best, a divided assembly, and a harmonious assembly.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders.
Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
And those who come afterwards follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the
lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called
an assembly of the best.

And what is a divided assembly? An assembly where the mendicants argue,
quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words.
This is called a divided assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly.

When the mendicants live in harmony like this, they create much merit.
At that time the mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the
heart's release by rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up.
When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the
body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind
becomes immersed in samādhi.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean.

In the same way, when the mendicants are in harmony, appreciating each
other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding
each other with kindly eyes, they create much merit. At that time the
mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the heart's release by
rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is
full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil,
they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi.

These are the three assemblies."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.96 The Thoroughbred (1st)  *Paṭhamaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant truly understands:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.97 The Thoroughbred (2nd)  *Dutiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king, ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. That's how a
mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.98 The Thoroughbred (3rd)  *Tatiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.99 Jute  *Potthakasutta*

"Jute canvas is ugly, unpleasant to touch, and worthless whether it's
new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out jute canvas for scrubbing
pots, or else they just throw it away on the rubbish heap.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is unethical, of bad character,
this is how they're ugly, I say. That person is just as ugly as jute
canvas. If you associate with, accompany, and attend to that person,
following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and suffering.
This is how they're unpleasant to touch, I say. That person is just as
unpleasant to touch as jute canvas. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are not very
fruitful or beneficial for the donor. This is how they're worthless, I
say. That person is just as worthless as jute canvas.

If a middle mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ... If you associate with, accompany, and attend to
that person, following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and
suffering. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks among the Saṅgha, the
mendicants say: 'What's an incompetent fool like you got to say? How on
earth could you imagine you've got something worth saying!' That person
becomes angry and upset, and blurts out things that make the
Saṅgha throw them out, as if they were throwing jute canvas
away on the rubbish heap.

<!--pg-->
Cloth from Kāsi is beautiful, pleasant to touch, and
valuable whether it's new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out cloth
from Kāsi for wrapping, or else they place it in a fragrant
casket.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is ethical, of good character,
this is how they're beautiful, I say. That person is just as beautiful
as cloth from Kāsi. If you associate with, accompany, and
attend to such a person, following their example, it will be for your
lasting welfare and happiness. This is how they're pleasant to touch, I
say. That person is just as pleasant to touch as cloth from
Kāsi. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick that they receive are very fruitful and beneficial
for the donor. This is how they're valuable, I say. That person is just
as valuable as cloth from Kāsi.

If a middle mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks in the midst of the
Saṅgha, the mendicants say: 'Venerables, be quiet! The
senior mendicant is speaking on the teaching and training.'

So you should train like this: 'We will be like cloth from
Kāsi, not like jute canvas.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.100 A Lump of Salt  *Loṇakapallasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a
deed, they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual
life could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Take the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them
in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad deed, but
experiences it in this life, without even a bit left over, let alone a
lot.

What kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell?
A person who hasn't developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, or
wisdom. They're small-minded and mean-spirited, living in suffering.
That kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell.

What kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it
in this life, without even a bit left over, let alone a lot? A person
who has developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.
They're not small-minded, but are big-hearted, living without limits.
That kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it
in this life, without even a bit left over, not to speak of a lot.

Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into a mug of water. What do
you think, mendicants? Would that mug of water become salty and
undrinkable?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because there is only a little water in the
bowl."

"Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into the Ganges river. What
do you think, mendicants? Would the Ganges river become salty and
undrinkable?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because the Ganges river is a vast mass of
water."

"This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit
left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Take the case of a person who is thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. While another person isn't
thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred
dollars.

What kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is poor, with few possessions
and little wealth. That kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing
half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

What kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is rich, affluent, and
wealthy. That kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but they go to hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad
deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit left over, not
to speak of a lot. ...

It's like a sheep dealer or butcher. They can execute, jail, fine, or
otherwise punish one person who steals from them, but not another.

What kind of person can they punish? A person who is poor, with few
possessions and little wealth. That's the kind of person they can
punish.

What kind of person can't they punish? A ruler or their chief minister
who is rich, affluent, and wealthy. That's the kind of person they can't
punish. In fact, all they can do is raise their joined palms and ask:
'Please, good sir, give me my sheep or pay me for it.'

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit
left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed,
they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual life
could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete end of
suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.101 A Panner  *Paṁsudhovakasutta*

"Native gold has coarse corruptions: sand, soil, and gravel. A panner or
their apprentice pours it into a pan, where they wash, rinse, and clean
it. When that's been eliminated, there are medium corruptions in the
native gold: fine grit and coarse sand. The panner washes it again. When
that's been eliminated, there are fine corruptions in the native gold:
fine sand and black grime. The panner washes it again. When that's been
eliminated, only golden flecks remain. A goldsmith or their apprentice
places the native gold in a crucible where they blow, melt, and smelt
it. Still the native gold is not settled and the dross is not totally
gone. It's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not
completely ready for working. But the goldsmith keeps on blowing,
melting, and smelting it. The native gold becomes pliable, workable, and
radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can
successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet,
earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant who is committed to the higher mind has
coarse corruptions: bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. A sincere,
capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and
obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are middling
corruptions: sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A sincere, capable
mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are fine corruptions:
thoughts of family, country, and status. A sincere, capable mendicant
gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, only thoughts about the
teaching are left. That immersion is not peaceful or sublime or tranquil
or unified, but is held in place by forceful suppression.

But there comes a time when that mind is stilled internally; it settles,
unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. That immersion is
peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not held in place by
forceful suppression. They extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and
powerful; controlling my body as far as the realm of divinity.' They are
capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within
range.

If they wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is
within range.

If they wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi\.
as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in
samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' They
are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is
within range.

If they wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of realizing
these things, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### AN 3.102 Basis  *Nimittasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on
three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity.

If a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses solely on the basis
of immersion, it's likely their mind will incline to laziness.

If they focus solely on the basis of exertion, it's likely their mind
will incline to restlessness.

If they focus solely on the basis of equanimity, it's likely their mind
won't properly become immersed in samādhi for the ending of
defilements.

But when a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to
time on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the
ending of defilements.

It's like when a goldsmith or a goldsmith's apprentice prepares a forge,
fires the crucible, picks up some native gold with tongs and puts it in
the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they
sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. If
they solely fanned it, the native gold would likely be scorched. If they
solely sprinkled water on it, the native gold would likely cool down. If
they solely watched over it, the native gold would likely not be
properly processed. But when that goldsmith fans it from time to time,
sprinkles water on it from time to time, and watches over it from time
to time, that native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can successfully
create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a
necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus
on three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity. ...

When a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to time
on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in samādhi for the
ending of defilements. They extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power' ...

'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both
kinds of sounds, human and divine, whether near or far.' ... 'May I
recollect many kinds of past lives.' ... 'With clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and
being reborn.' ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range."

::: center
*[the third fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

