# The Great Chapter

### N 3.61 Sectarian Tenets  *TitthƒÅyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, these three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and
grilled by the astute---when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction. What three?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of past deeds.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of God Almighty's creation.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---has no cause or reason.'

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of past deeds, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because
of past deeds.'

Those who believe that past deeds are the most important thing have no
enthusiasm or effort, no idea that there are things that should and
should not be done. Since they don't actually find that there are things
that should and should not be done, they're unmindful and careless, and
can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my first legitimate refutation
of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of God Almighty's
creation, and I said to them: 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that
case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious,
or have wrong view, all because of God Almighty's creation.'

Those who believe that God Almighty's creative power is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
second legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced has no cause or reason, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all without
cause or reason.'

Those who believe that the absence of cause or reason is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
third legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.
