## The Great Chapter

### N 3.61 Sectarian Tenets  *TitthƒÅyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, these three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and
grilled by the astute---when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction. What three?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of past deeds.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of God Almighty's creation.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---has no cause or reason.'

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of past deeds, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because
of past deeds.'

Those who believe that past deeds are the most important thing have no
enthusiasm or effort, no idea that there are things that should and
should not be done. Since they don't actually find that there are things
that should and should not be done, they're unmindful and careless, and
can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my first legitimate refutation
of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of God Almighty's
creation, and I said to them: 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that
case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious,
or have wrong view, all because of God Almighty's creation.'

Those who believe that God Almighty's creative power is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
second legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced has no cause or reason, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all without
cause or reason.'

Those who believe that the absence of cause or reason is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
third legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

These are the three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and grilled
by the astute---which, when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction.

But the Dhamma that I've taught is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond
reproach, and not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins. What is the
Dhamma that I've taught?

'These are the six elements': this is the Dhamma I've taught ...

'These are the six fields of contact': this is the Dhamma I've taught
...

'These are the eighteen mental preoccupations': this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...

'These are the four noble truths': this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six elements: the elements of earth, water, fire, air,
space, and consciousness.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six fields of contact: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind contact.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' This is what I said, but why did I say it?

Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that's a
basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

Hearing a sound with the ear ...

Smelling an odor with the nose ...

Tasting a flavor with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ...

Becoming conscious of an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an
idea that's a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

Supported by the six elements, an embryo is conceived. When it is
conceived, there are name and form. Name and form are conditions for the
six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. It's for one who feels that I
declare: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ...
'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are suffering; association with the disliked is suffering;
separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is
suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. This is
called the noble truth of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? Ignorance is a
condition for choices. Choices are a condition for consciousness.
Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are
conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions
for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition
for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this
entire mass of suffering originates. This is called the noble truth of
the origin of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? When
ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease.
When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases,
name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields
cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact
ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When
craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.
This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the noble
truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it."

### N 3.62 Perils  *Bhayasutta*

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and
a child can't find their mother. This is the first peril that tears
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find
their mother. This is the second peril that tears mothers and children
apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find their
mother. This is the third peril that tears mothers and children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
tear mothers and children apart.

Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
don't tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her
child, and a child can find their mother. This is the first peril that
doesn't tear mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child
can find their mother. This is the second peril that doesn't tear
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find
their mother. This is the third peril that doesn't tear mothers and
children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
don't tear mothers and children apart.

There are three perils that tear mothers and children apart. What three?

The perils of old age, sickness, and death. When a child is growing old,
a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me grow old, may my child not grow
old!' When a mother is growing old, a child doesn't get their wish: 'Let
me grow old, may my mother not grow old!'

When a child is sick, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me be sick,
may my child not be sick!' When a mother is sick, a child doesn't get
their wish: 'Let me be sick, may my mother not be sick!'

When a child is dying, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me die, may
my child not die!' When a mother is dying, a child doesn't get their
wish: 'Let me die, may my mother not die!' These are the three perils
that tear mothers and children apart.

There is a path and a practice that leads to giving up and going beyond
the three perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the
three perils that do tear mothers and children apart. What is that path
and practice? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice that leads to giving up and going beyond the three
perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the three perils
that do tear mothers and children apart."

### N 3.63 At VenƒÅgapura  *VenƒÅgapurasutta*

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants when he arrived
at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named [VenƒÅgapura]{lang="sa"}. The
brahmins and householders of [VenƒÅgapura]{lang="sa"} heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at [VenƒÅgapura]{lang="sa"}. He has this good
reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, [MƒÅras]{lang="sa"}, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of [VenƒÅgapura]{lang="sa"} went up to
the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged
greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms
toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept
silent. Then the brahmin Vacchagotta of [VenƒÅgapura]{lang="sa"} said to
the Buddha:

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how your faculties are so
very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. It's
like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, or a palm fruit freshly
plucked from the stalk, or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned
by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug
where it shines and glows and radiates. In the same way, your faculties
are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright.

Surely Mister Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty,
various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: sofas, couches,
woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers,
quilted, embroidered with animals, double-or single-fringed---and silk
covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woven carpets, rugs
for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope hide rugs, and spreads of
fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends."

"Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding are hard for
renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they're not allowed.

There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. What three? The
heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and
the noble high and luxurious bed. These are the three high and luxurious
beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third
absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the giving up of
pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. When I'm practicing like this, if
I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. When I'm practicing like
this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. When I'm
practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly.
When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is
heavenly. This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

But what, Mister Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction,
and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity
and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a
heart full of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart
full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third,
and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I
meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. When I'm practicing like this, if I walk, at that
time my walking is divine. ... my standing is divine. ... my sitting is
divine. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my
lying is divine. This is the divine high and luxurious bed that I get
these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a divine high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the noble high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
his presence. I know this: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut
them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so
they're unable to arise in the future.' When I'm practicing like this,
if I walk, at that time my walking is noble. ... my standing is noble.
... my sitting is noble. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down,
at that time my lying is noble. This is the noble high and luxurious bed
that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a noble high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us
as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.64 With Sarabha  *Sarabhasutta*

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[RƒÅjagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time a wanderer called Sarabha had recently left this
teaching and training. He was telling a crowd in [RƒÅjagaha]{lang="sa"},
"I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I
left their teaching and training."

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered [RƒÅjagaha]{lang="sa"} for alms. They heard what
Sarabha was saying.

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "The wanderer
called Sarabha has recently left this teaching and training. He was
telling a crowd in [RƒÅjagaha]{lang="sa"}: 'I learned the teaching of the
ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I left their teaching and
training.' Sir, please go to the wanderers' monastery on the banks of
the [Sappinƒ´]{lang="sa"} river to see Sarabha the wanderer out of
sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the wanderers' monastery on the banks of the [Sappinƒ´]{lang="sa"} river
to visit Sarabha the wanderer. He sat on the seat spread out, and said
to the wanderer Sarabha, "Is it really true, Sarabha, that you've been
saying: 'I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan,
then I left their teaching and training.'" When he said this, Sarabha
kept silent.

For a second time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Tell me, Sarabha, what
exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the
Sakyan? If you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you
have learned it fully, I'll agree." For a second time, Sarabha kept
silent.

For a third time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Sarabha, the teachings of
the ascetics who follow the Sakyan are clear to me. What exactly have
you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? If
you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you have learned
it fully, I'll agree." For a third time, Sarabha kept silent.

Then those wanderers said to Sarabha, "The ascetic Gotama has offered to
tell you anything you ask for. Speak, reverend Sarabha, what exactly
have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan?
If you've not learned it fully, he'll fill you in. But if you have
learned it fully, he'll agree." When this was said, Sarabha sat silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to the wanderers:

"Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to be a fully awakened
Buddha, but you don't understand these things.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to have ended all
defilements, but you still have these defilements.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'Your teaching does not lead someone
who practices it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which
it is taught.' Then I'd carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that
point. When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of
these three categories. They'd dodge the issue, distracting the
discussion with irrelevant points. They'd display annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. Or they'd sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping,
downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha."

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar three times in the
wanderers' monastery on the bank of the [Sappinƒ´]{lang="sa"} river, rose
into the air and flew away.

Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers beset Sarabha on all sides
with sneering and jeering. "Reverend Sarabha, you're just like an old
jackal in the formidable wilderness who thinks, 'I'll roar a lion's
roar!' but they still only manage to squeal and yelp like a jackal. In
the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll roar a
lion's roar!' but you only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal.

You're just like a marsh hen who thinks, 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!' but
they still only manage to cry like a marsh hen. In the same way, when
the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!' but
you still only managed to cry like a marsh hen.

You're just like a bull that thinks to bellow only when the cowstall is
empty. In the same way, you only thought to bellow when the ascetic
Gotama wasn't here." That's how those wanderers beset Sarabha on all
sides with sneering and jeering.

### N 3.65 With the KƒÅlƒÅmas of Kesamutta  *Kesamuttisutta*

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of
mendicants when he arrived at a town of the [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"} named
Kesamutta. The [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"} of Kesamutta heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Kesamutta. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha ...' It's good to see
such perfected ones."

Then the [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down
to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite
conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some
announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one
side the [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"} said to the Buddha:

"There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who come to Kesamutta. They
explain and promote only their own doctrine, while they attack,
badmouth, disparage, and smear the doctrines of others. Then some other
ascetics and brahmins come to Kesamutta. They too explain and promote
only their own doctrine, while they attack, badmouth, disparage, and
smear the doctrines of others. So, sir, we're doubting and uncertain: 'I
wonder who of these respected ascetics and brahmins speaks the truth,
and who speaks falsehood?'"

"It is enough, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, for you to be doubting and
uncertain. Doubt has come up in you about an uncertain matter.

Please, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}? Does greed come up in a person
for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A greedy individual, overcome by greed, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}? Does hate come up in a person
for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A hateful individual, overcome by hate, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}? Does delusion come up in a
person for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A deluded individual, overcome by delusion, kills living creatures,
steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is
that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake
them, they lead to welfare and happiness', then you should acquire them
and keep them.

What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}? Does contentment come up in a
person for their welfare or harm?"

"Welfare, sir."

"An individual who is content, not overcome by greed, doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do
the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}? Does love come up in a person
for their welfare or harm? ... Does understanding come up in a person
for their welfare or harm? ... Is that for their lasting welfare and
happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, [KƒÅlƒÅmas]{lang="sa"}, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of rejoicing to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
uncorrupted and purified, they've won four consolations in this very
life. 'If it turns out there is another world, and good and bad deeds
have a result, then---when the body breaks up, after death---I'll be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' This is the first consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out there is no other world, and good and bad deeds don't
have a result, then in this very life I'll keep myself free of enmity
and ill will, untroubled and happy.' This is the second consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out that bad things happen to people who do bad things,
then since I have no bad intentions, and since I'm not doing anything
bad, how can suffering touch me?' This is the third consolation they've
won.

'If it turns out that bad things don't happen to people who do bad
things, then I still see myself pure on both sides.' This is the fourth
consolation they've won.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
undefiled and purified, they've won these four consolations in this very
life."

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! When that noble
disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will, undefiled and
purified, they've won these four consolations in this very life. ...

Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... We go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth,
may the Buddha remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for
life."

### N 3.66 With SƒÅ·∏∑ha and His Friend  *SƒÅ·∏∑hasutta*

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was
staying near [SƒÅvatthƒ´]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of
[MigƒÅra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then
[SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}, [MigƒÅra]{lang="sa"}'s grandson, and
[Roha·πáa]{lang="sa"}, [Pekhu·πáiya]{lang="sa"}'s grandson went up to
Venerable Nandaka, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Venerable
Nandaka said to [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}:

"Please, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"} and friend, don't go by oral transmission,
don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical
authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by
reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after
deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think
'The ascetic is our respected teacher.' But when you know for
yourselves: 'These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering', then you should give them up.

What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}? Is greed real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Covetousness' is what I mean by this. A person who is greedy and
covetous kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}? Is hate real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Malice' is what I mean by this. A hateful and malicious person kills
living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others
to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}? Is delusion real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Ignorance' is what I mean by this. A person who is deluded and
ignorant kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"} and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by
oral transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go
by canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference,
don't go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a
view after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and
don't think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know
for yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"} and friend, don't go by oral transmission,
don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical
authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by
reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after
deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think
'The ascetic is our respected teacher.' But when you know for
yourselves: 'These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible
people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness', then you should acquire them and keep them.

What do you think? Is contentment real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Satisfaction' is what I mean by this. A person who is content and
satisfied doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or
encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and
happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

What do you think? Is love real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Kindness' is what I mean by this. A loving and kind-hearted person
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}? Is understanding real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Knowledge' is what I mean by this. A person who understands and knows
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, [SƒÅ·∏∑ha]{lang="sa"} and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by
oral transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go
by canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference,
don't go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a
view after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and
don't think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know
for yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love ...
compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will.

They understand: 'There is this, there is what is worse than this, there
is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of
perception.' Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When
they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

They understand: 'Formerly there was greed, which was unskillful. Now
there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was hate, which was
unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was
delusion, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful.'
So they live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

### N 3.67 Topics of Discussion  *KathƒÅvatthusutta*

"There are, mendicants, these three topics of discussion. What three?
You might discuss the past: 'That is how it was in the past.' You might
discuss the future: 'That is how it will be in the future.' Or you might
discuss the present: 'This is how it is at present.'

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if it needs to be answered categorically and they don't answer
it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer without
analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer without
a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they don't set it
aside, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a
person is asked a question, if it needs to be answered categorically and
they answer it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer
after analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer
with a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they set it
aside, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they're not consistent about what their position is and
what it isn't; about what they propose; about speaking from what they
know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that person is not
competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a question, if
they are consistent about what their position is and what it isn't;
about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about
the appropriate procedure, then that person is competent to hold a
discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they don't dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes,
then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is
asked a question, if they don't intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on
trivial mistakes, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person has what's required by seeing how
they take part in a discussion. If they actively listen they have what's
required; if they don't actively listen they don't have what's required.
Someone who has what's required directly knows one thing, completely
understands one thing, gives up one thing, and realizes one thing---and
then they experience complete freedom. This is the purpose of
discussion, consultation, the requirements, and listening well, that is,
the liberation of the mind by not grasping.

> Those who converse with hostility,\
> too sure of themselves, arrogant,\
> ignoble, attacking virtues,\
> they look for flaws in each other.
>
> They rejoice together when their opponent\
> speaks poorly and makes a mistake,\
> becoming confused and defeated---\
> but the noble ones don't discuss like this.
>
> If an astute person wants to hold a discussion\
> connected with the teaching and its meaning---\
> the kind of discussion that noble ones hold---\
> then that wise one should start the discussion,
>
> knowing when the time is right,\
> neither hostile nor arrogant.\
> Not over-excited,\
> contemptuous, or aggressive,
>
> or with a mind full of jealousy,\
> they'd speak from what they rightly know.\
> They agree with what was well spoken,\
> without criticizing what was poorly said.
>
> They'd not persist in finding faults,\
> nor seize on trivial mistakes,\
> neither intimidating nor crushing the other,\
> nor would they speak suggestively.
>
> Good people consult\
> for the sake of knowledge and clarity.\
> That's how the noble ones consult,\
> this is a noble consultation.\
> Knowing this, an intelligent person\
> would consult without arrogance."

### N 3.68 Followers of Other Religions  *A√±√±atitthiyasutta*

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' How would you answer
them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' You should answer
them: 'Greed, reverends, is mildly blameworthy, but slow to fade away.
Hate is very blameworthy, but quick to fade away. Delusion is very
blameworthy, and slow to fade away.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The
beautiful feature of things. When you apply the mind irrationally to the
beautiful feature of things, greed arises, and once arisen it increases
and grows. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed arises, and
once arisen it increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate arises,
and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The feature of
harshness. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of
harshness, hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is
the cause, this is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say:
'Irrational application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally,
delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is the
cause, this is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'The ugly feature of things. When you apply the mind rationally on the
ugly feature of things, greed doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say: 'The
heart's release by love.' When you apply the mind rationally on the
heart's release by love, hate doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'Rational application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally,
delusion doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up. This is
the cause, this is the reason why delusion doesn't arise, or if it's
already arisen it's given up.'"

### N 3.69 Unskillful Roots  *Akusalam≈´lasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three unskillful roots. What three? Greed,
hate, and delusion.

Greed is a root of the unskillful. When a greedy person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a greedy
person, overcome by greed, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by greed.

Hate is a root of the unskillful. When a hateful person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a hateful
person, overcome by hate, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by hate.

Delusion is a root of the unskillful. When a deluded person chooses to
act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a
deluded person, overcome by delusion, causes another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced
in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by delusion. Such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they're scornful and admit nothing. When
someone makes a baseless criticism, they make no effort to explain,
'This is why that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born of greed,
hate, and delusion---suffers in this very life, with distress, anguish,
and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect to
be reborn in a bad place.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. It would fall to ruin and disaster. In the
same way, such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born
of greed, hate, and delusion---suffers in this very life, with distress,
anguish, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect to be reborn in a bad place.

These are the three unskillful roots.

There are these three skillful roots. What three? Contentment, love, and
understanding.

Contentment is a root of the skillful. When a contented person chooses
to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a
contented person, not overcome by greed, doesn't cause another to suffer
under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by contentment.

Love is a root of the skillful. When a loving person chooses to act by
way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a loving
person, not overcome by hate, doesn't cause another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by love.

Understanding is a root of the skillful. When an understanding person
chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful.
When an understanding person, not overcome by delusion, doesn't cause
another to suffer under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment
or confiscation or condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful,
I want power', that too is skillful. And so these many skillful things
are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by
understanding. Such a person is said to have speech that's well-timed,
true, meaningful, in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person doesn't cause another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they admit it and aren't scornful. When someone
makes a baseless criticism, they make an effort to explain, 'This is why
that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a person is
said to have speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful, in line with
the teaching and training.

For such a person, bad unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and
delusion are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated,
and unable to arise in the future. In this very life they're happy, free
of distress, anguish, and fever, and they're also extinguished in this
very life.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. Then along comes a person with a spade and
basket. They'd cut the creeper out by the roots, dig them up, and pull
them out, down to the fibers and stems. Then they'd split the creeper
apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They'd dry the
splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to
ashes. Then they'd sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream. So those camel's foot creepers would be cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, and obliterated, unable to
arise in the future. In the same way, for such a person, bad unskillful
qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion are cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
In this very life they're happy, free of distress, anguish, and fever,
and they're also extinguished in this very life.

These are the three skillful roots."

### N 3.70 Sabbath  *Uposathasutta*

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[SƒÅvatthƒ´]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of [MigƒÅra]{lang="sa"}'s
mother in the Eastern Monastery.

Then [VisƒÅkhƒÅ]{lang="sa"}, [MigƒÅra]{lang="sa"}'s mother, went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her, "So,
[VisƒÅkhƒÅ]{lang="sa"}, where are you coming from in the middle of the
day?"

"Today, sir, I'm observing the sabbath."

"There are, [VisƒÅkhƒÅ]{lang="sa"}, these three sabbaths. What three? The
sabbath of the cowherds, the sabbath of the Jains, and the sabbath of
the noble ones.

And what is the sabbath of the cowherds? It's just like a cowherd who,
in the late afternoon, takes the cows back to their owners. They
reflect: 'Today the cows grazed in this spot and that, and they drank in
this spot and that. Tomorrow the cows will graze in this spot and that,
and drink in this spot and that.' In the same way, someone keeping the
sabbath reflects: 'Today I ate this and that, and had a meal of this and
that. Tomorrow I'll eat this and that, and have a meal of this and
that.' And so they spend their day with a mind full of covetousness.
That's the sabbath of the cowherds. When the cowherd's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the Jains? There's a kind of ascetic
belonging to a group called the Jains. They encourage their disciples:
'Please, good people, don't hurt any living creatures more than a
hundred leagues away to the east. Don't hurt any living creatures more
than a hundred leagues away to the west. Don't hurt any living creatures
more than a hundred leagues away to the north. Don't hurt any living
creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the south.' So they
encourage kindness and sympathy for some creatures and not others. On
the sabbath, they encourage their disciples: 'Please, good people, take
off all your clothes and say: "I don't belong to anyone anywhere! And
nothing belongs to me anywhere!"' But their mother and father still
know, 'This is our child.' And they know, 'This is my mother and
father.' Partner and child still know, 'This is our supporter.' And they
know, 'This is my partner and child.' Bondservants, workers, and staff
still know: 'This is our master.' And they know, 'These are my
bondservants, workers, and staff.' So, at a time when they should be
encouraged to speak the truth, the Jains encourage them to lie. This, I
say, is lying. When the night has passed they use their possessions once
more, though they've not been given back to them. This, I say, is
stealing. That's the sabbath of the Jains. When the Jain's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the noble ones? A corrupt mind is cleaned by
applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort?
It's when a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect
the Realized One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty head by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty head cleaned by applying effort? With cleansing
paste, clay, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. In the
same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect the Realized
One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are
given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of
the divinity, living together with the divinity. And because they think
of the divinity their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind is cleaned by
applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' As they recollect
the teaching, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty body by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty body cleaned by applying effort? With cleanser and
powder, water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty body is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the
Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.' As they recollect the teaching, their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A
noble disciple who observes the sabbath of Dhamma, living together with
Dhamma. And because they think of the Dhamma their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples
is practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' As they recollect the
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty cloth by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty cloth cleaned by applying effort? With salt, lye, cow
dung, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty cloth is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of
the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is
worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration with joined palms. It
is the supreme field of merit for the world.' As they recollect the
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes
the sabbath of the [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}, living together with the
[Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}. And because they think of the [Sa·πÖgha]{lang="sa"}
their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given
up.' That's how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects their
own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. As they recollect their ethical conduct, their
mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.
It's just like cleaning a dirty mirror by applying effort.

And how is a dirty mirror cleaned by applying effort? With oil, ash, a
rolled-up cloth, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty mirror is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. As they recollect their
ethical conduct, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes
the sabbath of ethical conduct, living together with ethics. And because
they think of their ethical conduct their mind becomes clear, joy
arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind
is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
deities: 'There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the
thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to
imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by others, the gods of
the Divinity's host, and gods even higher than these. When those deities
passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.' As they recollect the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleansing corrupt native gold
by applying effort.

And how is corrupt native gold cleansed by applying effort? With a
furnace, flux, a blowpipe, and tongs, and by applying the appropriate
effort. That's how corrupt native gold is cleansed by applying effort.
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the gods of the four great
kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods,
the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by
others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and gods even higher than
these. When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there
because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I,
too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.' As they recollect the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom of both themselves and those deities, their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A
noble disciple who observes the sabbath of the deities, living together
with the deities. And because they think of the deities their mind
becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's
how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the perfected
ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword.
They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living
beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living
creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous and
kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take
only what's given, and expect only what's given. They keep themselves
clean by not thieving. I, too, for this day and night will give up
stealing. I'll take only what's given, and expect only what's given.
I'll keep myself clean by not thieving. I will observe the sabbath by
doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I, too, for this
day and night will give up unchastity. I will be celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I will observe the sabbath by doing as
the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the
truth and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't
trick the world with their words. I, too, for this day and night will
give up lying. I'll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I'll be
honest and dependable, and won't trick the world with my words. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. I, too, for this day and night will give up beer, wine, and
liquor intoxicants. I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected
ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. I, too,
for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night and food at the wrong time. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones refrain from seeing shows of
dancing, singing, and music; and beautifying and adorning themselves
with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I, too, for this day and night
will refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music ; and
beautifying and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I
will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this
respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I, too,
for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll sleep
in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'

That's the sabbath of the noble ones. When the sabbath of the noble ones
is observed like this it's very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---[A·πÖga]{lang="sa"}, Magadha, [KƒÅsi]{lang="sa"},
Kosala, Vajji, Malla, [Cetƒ´]{lang="sa"}, Vaccha, Kuru,
[Pa√±cƒÅla]{lang="sa"}, Maccha, [S≈´rasena]{lang="sa"}, Assaka, Avanti,
[GandhƒÅra]{lang="sa"}, and Kamboja---full of the seven treasures. This
wouldn't be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight
factors. Why is that? Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The lifespan of the gods of the four great kings is five
hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of
the thirty-three. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The lifespan of the gods of the thirty-three is a
thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
thirty-three. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Two hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
of Yama. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make up a
year. The lifespan of the gods of Yama is two thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Four hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
joyful gods. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make
up a year. The lifespan of the joyful gods is four thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the joyful gods. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Eight hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
who love to imagine. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such
months make up a year. The lifespan of the gods who love to imagine is
eight thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods who love
to imagine. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human kingship
is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The lifespan of the gods who
control what is imagined by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink liquor.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed,\
> \>or a mat on the ground.\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha,\
> \>who has gone to suffering's end.
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or lustrous gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the sabbath with its eight factors,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

