# The Chapter on Awakening

### N 3.103 Before Awakening  *Pubbevasambodhasutta*

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification in the world?
What's the drawback? What's the escape?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from the
world: this is its gratification.

That the world is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its
drawback.

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the world: this is its
escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn't announce my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 3.104 Gratification (1st)  *Paṭhamaassādasutta*

"Mendicants, I went in search of the world's gratification, and I found
it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in
the world. I went in search of the world's drawbacks, and I found them.
I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawbacks in the
world. I went in search of escape from the world, and I found it. I've
seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the world.

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce my supreme
perfect awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in
this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 3.105 Gratification (2nd)  *Dutiyaassādasutta*

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the world, sentient
beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But because there is gratification in
the world, sentient beings are aroused by it.

If the world had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But since the world has a drawback, sentient
beings do grow disillusioned with it.

If there were no escape from the world, sentient beings wouldn't escape
from it. But since there is an escape from the world, sentient beings do
escape from it.

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven't
escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they don't live detached, liberated, with a mind free of
limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, they've escaped from this
world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---and
they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.106 Ascetics and Brahmins  *Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
the world's gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I
don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having
realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I deem them as
true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own
insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.107 Wailing  *Ruṇṇasutta*

"Singing is regarded as wailing in the training of the Noble One.
Dancing is regarded as madness. Too much laughter, showing the teeth, is
regarded as childish. So break off singing and dancing; and when you're
appropriately pleased, it's enough to simply smile."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.108 Satisfaction  *Atittisutta*

"Mendicants, there are three indulgences that never satisfy. What three?
Sleep, drinking beer and wine, and sexual intercourse. These are the
three indulgences that never satisfy."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.109 Unprotected  *Arakkhitasutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when the mind is unprotected, deeds of body, speech, and
mind are unprotected. When deeds are unprotected, they fester. When
deeds fester, they become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are unprotected. They fester, and become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and
mental deeds are unprotected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

When the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are
protected. When deeds are protected, they don't fester. When deeds don't
fester, they don't become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind aren't rotten will have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are protected. They don't get soaked, and they don't become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental
deeds are protected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind
aren't rotten will have a good death."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.110 Fallen  *Byāpannasutta*

Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika:

"Householder, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds
are fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen
will not have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The
roof peak, rafters, and walls fall in. In the same way, when the mind is
fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. Someone whose deeds
of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death.

When the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not
fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen
will have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof
peak, rafters, and walls are not fallen in. In the same way, when the
mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen.
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a
good death."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.111 Sources (1st)  *Paṭhamanidānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.
Any deed that emerges from greed, hate, or delusion---born, sourced, and
originated from greed, hate, or delusion---is unskillful, blameworthy,
results in suffering, and leads to the creation of more deeds, not their
cessation. These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

<!--pg-->
There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to
deeds. Any deed that emerges from contentment, love, or
understanding---born, sourced, and originated from contentment, love, or
understanding---is skillful, blameless, results in happiness, and leads
to the cessation of more deeds, not their creation. These are three
sources that give rise to deeds."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.112 Sources (2nd)  *Dutiyanidānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three?

Desire comes up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past,
future, or present. And how does desire come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? In your
heart you think about and consider things that stimulate desire and
greed in the past, future, or present. When you do this, desire comes
up, and you get attached to those things. This lust in the heart is what
I call a fetter. That's how desire comes up for things that stimulate
desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

<!--pg-->
There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Desire doesn't come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the
past, future, or present. And how does desire not come up for things
that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? You
understand the future result of things that stimulate desire and greed
in the past, future, or present. When you know this, you grow
disillusioned, your heart becomes dispassionate, and you see it with
penetrating wisdom. That's how desire doesn't come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds."

