# The Chapter on Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed

### N 3.183--352 Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc.  *Rāgapeyyāla*

"For insight into greed, three things should be developed. What three?
Emptiness immersion; signless immersion; and undirected immersion. For
insight into greed, these three things should be developed.

For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ...

hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ... obstinacy
... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ...
insight ... complete understanding ... complete ending ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
For the letting go of negligence, these three things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.tra

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE THREES IS FINISHED.
:::

## Colophon

<!--pg-->
### The Translator

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

<!--pg-->
### Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the
Pali Tipiṭaka. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

<!--pg-->
### The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

<!--pg-->
### About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.
