# The Chapter on Fools

### N 3.1 Perils  *Bhayasutta*

So I have heard.At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute. It's like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds
or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out,
draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. In the same way,
whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute.

So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe. The fool is
perilous, but the astute person is not. The fool is hazardous, but the
astute person is not. There's no danger, peril, or hazard that comes
from the astute.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.2 Characteristics  *Lakkhaṇasutta*

"A fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is
characterized by their deeds, for wisdom is made beautiful when it is
evident. A fool is known by three things. What three? Bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.3 Thinking  *Cintīsutta*

"There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a
fool. What three? A fool thinks poorly, speaks poorly, and acts poorly.
If a fool didn't think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then how
would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an untrue
person'? But since a fool does think poorly, speak poorly, and act
poorly, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an
untrue person'. These are the three characteristics, signs, and
manifestations of a fool.

There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an
astute person. What three? An astute person thinks well, speaks well,
and acts well. If an astute person didn't think well, speak well, and
act well, then how would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is
astute, a true person'? But since an astute person does think well,
speak well, and act well, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow
is astute, a true person'. These are the three characteristics, signs,
and manifestations of an astute person. So you should train ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.4 Mistakes  *Accayasutta*

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They don't recognize when
they've made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don't deal with
it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they
don't accept it properly.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They recognize
when they've made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it
properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept
it properly.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.5 Irrational  *Ayonisosutta*

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They ask a question
irrationally. They answer a question irrationally. And when someone else
answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they disagree with it.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They ask a
question rationally. They answer a question rationally. And when someone
else answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they agree with it.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.6 Unskillful  *Akusalasutta*

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Unskillful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Skillful deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.7 Blameworthy  *Sāvajjasutta*

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Blameworthy deeds by way
of body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by blameless
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.8 Hurtful  *Sabyābajjhasutta*

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Hurtful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by kind deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things by which an
astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three qualities by
which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three
qualities by which an astute person is known.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.9 Broken  *Khatasutta*

"When a foolish, incompetent, untrue person has three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What
three? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What three?
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When an astute, competent true person has these three qualities they
keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

<!--pg-->
### N 3.10 Stains  *Malasutta*

"Anyone who has three qualities, and has not given up three stains, is
cast down to hell. What three? They're unethical, and haven't given up
the stain of immorality. They're jealous, and haven't given up the stain
of jealousy. They're stingy, and haven't given up the stain of
stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has not given up these three
stains, is cast down to hell.

Anyone who has three qualities, and has given up three stains, is raised
up to heaven. What three? They're ethical, and have given up the stain
of immorality. They're not jealous, and have given up the stain of
jealousy. They're not stingy, and have given up the stain of stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has given up these three
stains, is raised up to heaven."

