## The Chapter on a Warrior

### N 3.133 A Warrior  *Yodhājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, a warrior with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship. What three? He's
a long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who shatters large objects. A
warrior with these three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with three factors is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? They're a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects.

And how is a mendicant a long-distance shooter? It's when a mendicant
truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal
or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.' They truly see any kind of feeling at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* feeling---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of perception at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
perception---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.' They truly see any kind of choices at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* choices---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' That's how a mendicant is a long-distance
shooter.

And how is a mendicant a marksman? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is a
marksman.

And how does a mendicant shatter large objects? It's when a mendicant
shatters the great mass of ignorance. That's how a mendicant shatters
large objects.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

### N 3.134 Assemblies  *Parisāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three assemblies. What three? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, an assembly educated in questioning, and an
assembly educated to the fullest extent. These are the three
assemblies."

### N 3.135 A Friend  *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has three factors.
What three? They give what is hard to give, they do what is hard to do,
and they bear what is hard to bear. You should associate with a friend
who has these three factors."

### N 3.136 Arising  *Uppādāsutta*

"Mendicants, whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature
persists, this regularity of natural principles, this invariance of
natural principles: all conditions are impermanent. A Realized One
understands this and comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are
impermanent.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all conditions are suffering. A Realized One understands this and
comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes,
clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are suffering.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all things are not-self. A Realized One understands this and comprehends
it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies,
analyzes, and reveals it: 'All things are not-self.'"

### N 3.137 A Hair Blanket  *Kesakambalasutta*

"Mendicants, a hair blanket is said to be the worst kind of woven cloth.
It's cold in the cold, hot in the heat, ugly, smelly, and unpleasant to
touch. In the same way, the teaching of the bamboo-staffed ascetic is
said to be the worst of all the doctrines of the various ascetics and
brahmins.

The bamboo-staffed ascetic, that silly man, has this doctrine and view:
'There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.'

Now, all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived in the
past taught the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who will live in the
future will teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

I too, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha in the present,
teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the bamboo-staffed
ascetic opposes me by saying: 'There is no power in deeds, action, or
energy.'

It's like a trap set at the mouth of a river, which would bring harm,
suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish. In the same way that
futile man the bamboo-staffed ascetic is a trap for humans, it seems to
me. He has come into the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and
disaster of many beings."

### N 3.138 Accomplishment  *Sampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.139 Growth  *Vuddhisutta*

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of growth. What three? Growth in
faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three kinds of growth."

### N 3.140 A Wild Colt  *Assakhaḷuṅkasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild
people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three wild colts? One wild colt is fast, but not beautiful
or well proportioned. Another wild colt is fast and beautiful, but not
well proportioned. While another wild colt is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three wild colts.

And what are the three wild people? One wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another wild person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. But when asked a question about the teaching or
training, they falter without answering. This is how they're not
beautiful, I say. And they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well
proportioned, I say. This is how a wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. But they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I
say. This is how a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? It's
when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how
they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three wild people."

### N 3.141 Excellent Horses  *Assaparassasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three excellent horses and the three
excellent people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three excellent horses? One excellent horse is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent horse is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent horse is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent horses.

"What are the three excellent people? One excellent person is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent person is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, but not beautiful or well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter
without answering. This is how they're not beautiful, I say. And they
don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how
an excellent person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer
without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. But they don't
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how an
excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is
reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are not liable to
return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a
question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering.
This is how they're beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're
well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent people."

### N 3.142 The Thoroughbred  *Assājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three fine thoroughbred horses, and
the three fine thoroughbred people. Listen and apply your mind well, I
will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three fine thoroughbred horses? One fine thoroughbred
horse ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred horses.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? One fine thoroughbred
person ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a fine thoroughbred person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the
teaching or training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're
beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred people."

### N 3.143 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (1st)  *Paṭhamamoranivāpasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, at the
monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. What three?
The entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

### N 3.144 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (2nd)  *Dutiyamoranivāpasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of
revealing, and a demonstration of instruction.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

### N 3.145 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (3rd)  *Tatiyamoranivāpasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

