# The Chapter on Confirmed


### AN 4.81 Killing Living Creatures *Pāṇātipātasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and
lie. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie.
Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.82 Lying *Musāvādasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. Someone
with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.83 Where Criticism Takes You *Avaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of
criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise. They arouse
faith in things that are dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things
that are inspiring. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? After
examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of criticism,
and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't arouse faith in
things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.84 Valuing Anger *Kodhagarusutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They value anger, or denigration, or material things, or honor
rather than the true teaching. Someone with these four qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
value the true teaching rather than anger, or denigration, or material
things, or honor. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.85 From Darkness to Darkness *Tamotamasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  The dark bound for darkness,

2.  the dark bound for light,

3.  the light bound for darkness, and

4.  the light bound for light.

And how is a person dark and bound for darkness? It's when a person is
reborn in a low family---a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers,
hunters, chariot-makers, or scavengers---poor, with little to eat or
drink, where life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. And
they're ugly, unsightly, deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or
half-paralyzed. They don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting.
And they do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. That's how a person is dark and bound for
darkness.

And how is a person dark and bound for light? It's when a person is
reborn in a low family ... But they do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's how a person is dark and bound
for light.

And how is a person light and bound for darkness? It's when a person is
reborn in an eminent family---a well-to-do family of aristocrats,
brahmins, or householders---rich, affluent, and wealthy, with lots of
gold and silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and
grain. And they're attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. They get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. But they do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. That's how a person is light and bound for darkness.

And how is a person light and bound for light? It's when a person is
reborn in an eminent family ... And they do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's how a person is light and
bound for light.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.86 Sunk Low *Oṇatoṇatasutta*

"These four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One sunk low who sinks lower,

2.  one sunk low who rises high,

3.  one risen high who sinks low, and

4.  one risen high who rises higher.

... These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.87 The Son *Puttasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant is a
practicing trainee, who lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke. It's like the eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has
not yet been anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the
succession. In the same way, a mendicant is a practicing trainee, who
lives aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. That's how a
person is a confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. But they don't have direct meditative
experience of the eight liberations. That's how a person is a white
lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant realizes
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
... And they have direct meditative experience of the eight liberations.
That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept---robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---rarely
using them without invitation. When living with other spiritual
practitioners, they usually find themselves treated agreeably by them by
way of body, speech, and mind, and rarely disagreeably. And they are
usually presented with agreeable things by them, rarely with
disagreeable ones. They're healthy, so the various unpleasant
feelings---stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their
conjunction; or caused by change in weather, by not taking care of
yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past deeds---usually
don't come up. They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in
this life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ... That's how a person is an
exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me. For I usually use only what I've been invited to accept ...
When living with other mendicants, I am usually treated agreeably by
them. ... I'm healthy ... I get the four absorptions when I want,
without trouble or difficulty. And I've realized the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ... So if anyone
should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics, it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.88 Fetters *Saṁyojanasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of three fetters---is a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. That's how a person is a
confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and
delusion---is a once-returner. They come back to this world once only,
then make an end of suffering. That's how a person is a white lotus
ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant---with
the ending of the five lower fetters---is reborn spontaneously. They're
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. That's
how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. That's how a person is an
exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.89 Right View *Sammādiṭṭhisutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant has right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. That's how a person is a
confirmed ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when they have right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. But they don't have direct meditative experience of the eight
liberations. That's how a person is a white lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when they have right view
... and right freedom. And they do have direct meditative experience of
the eight liberations. That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept ... And
if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.90 Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic, the pink lotus ascetic, and
the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.

And how is a person a confirmed ascetic? It's when a mendicant is a
trainee who hasn't achieved their heart's desire, but lives aspiring to
the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. That's how a person is a confirmed
ascetic.

And how is a person a white lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 'Such
is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' But they don't have direct meditative experience of
the eight liberations. That's how a person is a white lotus ascetic.

And how is a person a pink lotus ascetic? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing rise and fall in the five grasping aggregates. 'Such
is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.' And they have direct meditative experience of the
eight liberations. That's how a person is a pink lotus ascetic.

And how is a person an exquisite ascetic of ascetics? It's when a
mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to accept ... And
if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me.

These are the four people found in the world."

