# The Chapter on Perils


### AN 4.121 Guilt *Attānuvādasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four fears. What four? The fears of guilt,
shame, punishment, and going to a bad place.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of guilt? It's when someone reflects:
'If I were to do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind, wouldn't I
blame myself for my conduct?' Being afraid of guilt, they give up bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called
the fear of guilt.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of shame? It's when someone reflects:
'If I were to do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind, wouldn't
others blame me for my conduct?' Being afraid of shame, they give up bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called
the fear of shame.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of punishment? It's when someone sees
that the kings have arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to
various punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands
or feet, or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot',
the 'shell-shave', the 'Rāhu's mouth', the 'garland of
fire', the 'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the
'antelope', the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the
'twisting bar', the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed
to the dogs, being impaled alive, and being beheaded.

They think: 'If I were to do the same kind of bad deed, the kings would
punish me in the same way.' ... Being afraid of punishment, they don't
steal the belongings of others. They give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the fear of punishment.

And what, mendicants, is the fear of rebirth in a bad place? It's when
someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad result
in the next life. If I were to do such bad things, when my body breaks
up, after death, I'd be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.' Being afraid of rebirth in a bad place, they give up
bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct
by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This is
called the fear of rebirth in a bad place.

These are the four fears."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.122 The Danger of Waves *Ūmibhayasutta*

"Mendicants, anyone who enters the water should anticipate four dangers.
What four? The dangers of waves, gharials, whirlpools, and sharks.

These are the four dangers that anyone who enters the water should
anticipate. In the same way, a gentleman gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness in this teaching and training should anticipate four
dangers. What four? The dangers of waves, gharials, whirlpools, and
sharks.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of waves? It's when a gentleman has
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, thinking:
'I'm swamped by rebirth, old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress. I'm swamped by suffering, mired in
suffering. Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of
suffering.' When they've gone forth, their spiritual companions advise
and instruct them: 'You should go out like this, and come back like
that. You should look to the front like this, and to the side like that.
You should contract your limbs like this, and extend them like that.
This is how you should bear your outer robe, bowl, and robes.' They
think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we advised and instructed others. And
now these mendicants---who you'd think were our children or
grandchildren---imagine they can advise and instruct us!' Angry and
upset, they resign the training and return to a lesser life. This is
called a mendicant who rejects the training and returns to a lesser life
for fear of the danger of waves. 'Danger of waves' is a term for anger
and distress. This is called the danger of waves.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of gharials? It's when a gentleman
has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, their spiritual companions advise and instruct them:
'You may eat, consume, taste, and drink these things, but not those. You
may eat what's allowable, but not what's unallowable. You may eat at the
right time, but not at the wrong time.' They think: 'Formerly, as
laypeople, we used to eat, consume, taste, and drink what we wanted, not
what we didn't want. We ate and drank both allowable and unallowable
things, at the right time and the wrong time. And these faithful
householders give us delicious fresh and cooked foods at the wrong time
of day. But these guys imagine they can gag our mouths!' Angry and
upset, they resign the training and return to a lesser life. This is
called a mendicant who rejects the training and returns to a lesser life
for fear of the danger of gharials. 'Danger of gharials' is a term for
gluttony. This is called the danger of gharials.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of whirlpools? It's when a gentleman
has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl
and robe, enter a village or town for alms without guarding body,
speech, and mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without
restraining the sense faculties. There they see a householder or their
child amusing themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. They think: 'Formerly, as laypeople, we amused
ourselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. And it's true that my family is wealthy. I can both enjoy
my wealth and make merit. Why don't I resign the training and return to
a lesser life, so I can enjoy my wealth and make merit?' They resign the
training and return to a lesser life. This is called a mendicant who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life for fear of the danger
of whirlpools. 'Danger of whirlpools' is a term for the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. This is called the danger of whirlpools.

And what, mendicants, is the danger of sharks? It's when a gentleman has
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness ... When
they've gone forth, they robe up in the morning and, taking their bowl
and robe, enter a village or town for alms without guarding body,
speech, and mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without
restraining the sense faculties. There they see a female scantily clad,
with revealing clothes. Lust infects their mind, so they resign the
training and return to a lesser life. This is called a mendicant who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life because they're afraid
of the danger of sharks. 'Danger of sharks' is a term for females. This
is called the danger of sharks.

These are the four dangers that a gentleman gone forth from the lay life
to homelessness in this teaching and training should anticipate."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.123 Difference (1st) *Paṭhamanānākaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying.
If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often
without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the
gods of the Divinity's host. The lifespan of the gods of the Divinity's
host is one eon. An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of
those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the
ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan
of those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that very life.
This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned
ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping
it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide in that, are
committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing it, when they
die they're reborn in the company of the gods of streaming radiance. The
lifespan of the gods of streaming radiance is two eons. An ordinary
person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they
go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the
Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then
they're extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a
learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person, that is, when
there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, with the fading away of rapture, enters
and remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide
in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing
it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of universal
beauty. The lifespan of the gods of universal beauty is four eons. An
ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent,
then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a
disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is
spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This is the
difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary
person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending
former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. They enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. If they
abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without
losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of
abundant fruit. The lifespan of the gods of abundant fruit is five
hundred eons. An ordinary person stays there until the lifespan of those
gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost
realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until the lifespan of
those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that very life. This
is the difference between a learned noble disciple and an unlearned
ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.124 Difference (2nd) *Dutiyanānākaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ...
They contemplate the phenomena there---included in form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of the pure
abodes. This rebirth is not shared with ordinary people.

Furthermore, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping
it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They contemplate the
phenomena there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the pure abodes. This rebirth is
not shared with ordinary people.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.125 Love (1st) *Paṭhamamettāsutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They enjoy this and like it and find it
satisfying. If they abide in that, are committed to it, and meditate on
it often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company
of the gods of the Divinity's host. The lifespan of the gods of the
Divinity's host is one eon. An ordinary person stays there until the
lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal
realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that
very life. This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and
an unlearned ordinary person, that is, when there is a place of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person meditates spreading a heart full of compassion ...
rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. They enjoy this and like it and find it satisfying. If they abide
in that, are committed to it, and meditate on it often without losing
it, when they die they're reborn in the company of the gods of streaming
radiance. The lifespan of the gods of streaming radiance is two eons.
... they're reborn in the company of the gods of universal beauty. The
lifespan of the gods of universal beauty is four eons. ... they're
reborn in the company of the gods of abundant fruit. The lifespan of the
gods of abundant fruit is five hundred eons. An ordinary person stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or
the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're
extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a learned
noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person, that is, when there is
a place of rebirth.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.126 Love (2nd) *Dutiyamettāsutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

Firstly, a person meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the company of the gods of the pure abodes. This rebirth is
not shared with ordinary people.

Furthermore, a person meditates spreading a heart full of compassion ...
rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of the pure
abodes. This rebirth is not shared with ordinary people.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.127 Incredible Things About the Realized One (1st) *Paṭhamatathāgataacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, with the appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear. What
four?

When the being intent on awakening passes away from the host of joyful
gods, he's conceived in his mother's womb, mindful and aware. And
then---in this world with its gods, Māras, and divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---an
immeasurable, magnificent light appears, surpassing the glory of the
gods. Even in the boundless void of interstellar space---so utterly dark
that even the light of the moon and the sun, so mighty and powerful,
makes no impression---an immeasurable, magnificent light appears,
surpassing the glory of the gods. And the sentient beings reborn there
recognize each other by that light: 'So, it seems other sentient beings
have been reborn here!' This is the first incredible and amazing thing
that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the being intent on awakening emerges from his mother's
womb, mindful and aware. And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light
appears ... even in the boundless void of interstellar space ... This is
the second incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance
of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the Realized One understands the supreme perfect awakening.
And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light appears ... even in the
boundless void of interstellar space ... This is the third incredible
and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

Furthermore, the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma.
And then ... an immeasurable, magnificent light appears ... even in the
boundless void of interstellar space ... This is the fourth incredible
and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

With the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, these four incredible and amazing things appear."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.128 Incredible Things About the Realized One (2nd) *Dutiyatathāgataacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, with the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one,
the fully awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear.
What four?

People like clinging, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized One
is teaching the Dhamma of non-clinging, they want to listen, they
actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the first
incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a
Realized One.

People like conceit, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized One
is teaching the Dhamma of removing conceit, they want to listen, they
actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the second
incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a
Realized One.

People like excitement, they love it and enjoy it. Yet when a Realized
One is teaching the Dhamma of peace, they want to listen, they actively
listen, and they try to understand. This is the third incredible and
amazing thing that appears with the appearance of a Realized One.

This population is lost in ignorance, swaddled in their shells. Yet when
a Realized One is teaching the Dhamma of removing ignorance, they want
to listen, they actively listen, and they try to understand. This is the
fourth incredible and amazing thing that appears with the appearance of
a Realized One.

With the appearance of a Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, four incredible and amazing things appear."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.129 Incredible Things About Ānanda *Ānandaacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four incredible and amazing things about
Ānanda. What four?

If an assembly of monks goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing
him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've
never had enough.

If an assembly of nuns ... laymen ... or laywomen goes to see Ānanda,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about Ānanda."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.130 Incredible Things About the Wheel-Turning Monarch *Cakkavattiacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four incredible and amazing things about a
wheel-turning monarch. What four?

If an assembly of aristocrats goes to see a wheel-turning monarch,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

If an assembly of brahmins ... householders ... or ascetics goes to see
a wheel-turning monarch, they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by
hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about a wheel-turning
monarch.

In the same way, there are these four incredible and amazing things
about Ānanda. What four?

If an assembly of monks goes to see Ānanda, they're uplifted by seeing
him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And when he falls silent, they've
never had enough.

If an assembly of nuns ... laymen ... or laywomen goes to see Ānanda,
they're uplifted by seeing him and uplifted by hearing him speak. And
when he falls silent, they've never had enough.

These are the four incredible and amazing things about Ānanda."

