# The Chapter on Direct Knowledges


### N 4.254 Insight *Abhiññāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four things. What four? There are things
that should be completely understood by direct knowledge. There are
things that should be given up by direct knowledge. There are things
that should be developed by direct knowledge. There are things that
should be realized by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be completely understood by direct
knowledge? The five grasping aggregates. These are called the things
that should be completely understood by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be given up by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for continued existence. These are called the
things that should be given up by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be developed by direct knowledge?
Serenity and discernment. These are called the things that should be
developed by direct knowledge.

And what are the things that should be realized by direct knowledge?
Knowledge and freedom. These are called the things that should be
realized by direct knowledge.

These are the four things."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.255 Searches *Pariyesanāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble searches. What four? Someone
liable to old age searches only for what grows old. Someone liable to
sickness searches only for what gets sick. Someone liable to death
searches only for what dies. Someone liable to become corrupted searches
only for what is defiled. These are the four ignoble searches.

There are these four noble searches. What four? Someone who is liable to
grow old, knowing the drawback in what grows old, searches for that
which is free of old age, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment. Someone who is liable to get sick, knowing the drawback
in what gets sick, searches for that which is free of sickness, the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment. Someone who is liable
to die, knowing the drawback in what dies, searches for that which is
free of death, the supreme sanctuary from the yoke, extinguishment.
Someone liable to become corrupted, knowing the drawback in what is
defiled, searches for the undefiled supreme sanctuary from the yoke,
extinguishment. These are the four noble searches."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.256 Ways of Being Inclusive *Saṅgahavatthusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of being inclusive. What four?
Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. These are the four ways
of being inclusive."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.257 With Māluṅkyaputta *Mālukyaputtasutta*

Then Venerable Māluṅkyaputta went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Well now, Māluṅkyaputta, what are we to say to the young
monks, when even an old man like you, elderly and senior, asks the
Realized One for brief advice?"

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy One
teach me the Dhamma in brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of
what the Buddha says! Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's
teaching!"

"Māluṅkyaputta, there are four things that give rise to
craving in a mendicant. What four? For the sake of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, or rebirth in this or that state. These are the four things
that give rise to craving in a mendicant. That craving is given up by a
mendicant, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and
unable to arise in the future. Then they're called a mendicant who has
cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending
conceit has made an end of suffering."

When Māluṅkyaputta had been given this advice by the
Buddha, he got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. Then
Māluṅkyaputta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Māluṅkyaputta became one of
the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 4.258 Families *Kulasutta*

"Mendicants, when families don't stay wealthy for long, it's always for
one or more of these four reasons. What four? They don't look for what's
lost; they don't fix old things; they eat and drink too much; or they
put an unethical woman or man in charge. When families don't stay
wealthy for long, it's always for one or more of these four reasons.

When families do stay wealthy for long, it's always for one or more of
these four reasons. What four? They look for what's lost; they fix old
things; they eat and drink in moderation; and they put an ethical woman
or man in charge. When families do stay wealthy for long, it's always
for one or more of these four reasons."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.259 A Thoroughbred (1st) *Paṭhamaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
four? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, fast,
and well-proportioned. A fine royal thoroughbred with these four factors
is worthy of a king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, fast, and well proportioned.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when they truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is fast.

And how is a mendicant well proportioned? It's when a mendicant receives
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.
That's how a mendicant is well proportioned.

A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.260 A Thoroughbred (2nd) *Dutiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with four factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
four? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, fast,
and well-proportioned. A fine royal thoroughbred with these four factors
is worthy of a king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with four qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What four? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, fast, and well proportioned.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant is fast.

And how is a mendicant well proportioned? It's when a mendicant receives
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.
That's how a mendicant is well proportioned.

A mendicant with these four qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.261 Powers *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the four powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.262 Wilderness *Araññasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four qualities they're not ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What four?
They have sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; or they're witless,
dull, and idiotic. When a mendicant has these four qualities they're not
ready to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest.

When a mendicant has four qualities they're ready to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What four? They have thoughts
of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and they're wise, bright,
and clever. When a mendicant has these four qualities they're ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.263 Deeds *Kammasutta*

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four?
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameworthy
view. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these four qualities
they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What four?
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameless view.
When an astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

