# Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed

<!--pg-->
### N 4.274 Mindfulness Meditation *Satipaṭṭhānasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.275 Right Efforts *Sammappadhānasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise. ...so that unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up ...
so that skillful qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that
have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are
fulfilled by development. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.276 Bases of Psychic Power *Iddhipādasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. For insight into greed, these four
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.277--303 Complete Understanding, Etc. *Pariññādisutta*

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, four things should be developed."

### N 4.304--783 Insight into Hate, Etc. *Dosaabhiññādisutta*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... four things should be developed."
