# The Great Chapter


### N 4.191 Followed by Ear *Sotānugatasutta*

"Mendicants, you can expect four benefits when the teachings have been
followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the mind, and well comprehended
theoretically. What four?

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They've followed those
teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them by the mind, and well
comprehended them theoretically. But they die unmindful and are reborn
in one of the orders of gods. Being happy there, passages of the
teaching come back to them. Memory comes up slowly, but then that being
quickly reaches distinction. This is the first benefit you can expect
when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the
mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. Though they're
happy there, passages of the teaching don't come back to them. However,
a mendicant with psychic powers, who has achieved mastery of the mind,
teaches Dhamma to the assembly of gods. They think: 'I used to lead the
spiritual life in this same teaching and training.' Memory comes up
slowly, but then that being quickly reaches distinction. Suppose a
person was skilled in the sound of drums. While traveling along a road
they hear the sound of drums. They wouldn't have any doubts or
uncertainties about whether that was the sound of drums or not. They'd
just conclude, 'That's the sound of drums.' In the same way, take a
mendicant who memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are
reborn in one of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but
then that being quickly reaches distinction. This is the second benefit
you can expect when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed,
examined by the mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. But passages of
the teaching don't come back to them when they're happy, nor does a
mendicant with psychic powers ... teach Dhamma to the assembly of gods.
However, a god teaches Dhamma to the assembly of gods. They think: 'I
used to lead the spiritual life in this same teaching and training.'
Memory comes up slowly, but then that being quickly reaches distinction.
Suppose a person was skilled in the sound of horns. While traveling
along a road they hear the sound of horns. They wouldn't have any doubt
about whether that was the sound of horns or not. They'd just conclude,
'That's the sound of horns.' In the same way, take a mendicant who
memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are reborn in one
of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but then that being
quickly reaches distinction. This is the third benefit you can expect
when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed, examined by the
mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations.
They've followed those teachings by ear, rehearsed them, examined them
by the mind, and well comprehended them theoretically. But they die
unmindful and are reborn in one of the orders of gods. But passages of
the teaching don't come back to them when they're happy, and neither a
mendicant with psychic powers ... nor a god teaches Dhamma to the
assembly of gods. But a being who has been reborn spontaneously reminds
another such being: 'Do you remember, good sir? Do you remember where we
used to lead the spiritual life?' He says: 'I remember, good sir, I
remember!' Memory comes up slowly, but then that being quickly reaches
distinction. Suppose there were two friends who had played together in
the sand. Some time or other they'd meet. And one friend would say to
the other: 'Do you remember this, friend? Do you remember that, friend?'
They'd say: 'I remember, friend, I remember!' In the same way, take a
mendicant who memorizes the teaching ... But they die unmindful and are
reborn in one of the orders of gods. ... Memory comes up slowly, but
then that being quickly reaches distinction. This is the fourth benefit
you can expect when the teachings have been followed by ear, rehearsed,
examined by the mind, and well comprehended theoretically.

You can expect these four benefits when the teachings have been followed
by ear, rehearsed, examined by the mind, and well comprehended
theoretically."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.192 Facts *Ṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things can be known in four situations. What
four?

You can get to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only
after a long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when
inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.

You can get to know a person's purity by dealing with them. ...

You can get to know a person's resilience in times of trouble. ...

You can get to know a person's wisdom by discussion. But only after a
long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.

'You can get to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only
after a long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when
inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Take a person who's living with someone else. They
come to know: 'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been broken,
tainted, spotty, and marred. Their deeds and behavior are inconsistent.
This venerable is unethical, not ethical.'

Take another person who's living with someone else. They come to know:
'For a long time this venerable's deeds have been intact, impeccable,
spotless, and unmarred. Their deeds and behavior are consistent. This
venerable is ethical, not unethical.' That's why I said that you can get
to know a person's ethics by living with them. But only after a long
time, not a short time; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.

'You can get to know a person's purity by dealing with them. ...' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? Take a person who has dealings with
someone else. They come to know: 'This venerable deals with one person
in one way. Then they deal with two, three, or many people each in
different ways. They're not consistent from one deal to the next. This
venerable's dealings are impure, not pure.'

Take another person who has dealings with someone else. They come to
know: 'This venerable deals with one person in one way. Then they deal
with two, three, or many people each in the same way. They're consistent
from one deal to the next. This venerable's dealings are pure, not
impure.' That's why I said that you can get to know a person's purity by
dealing with them. ...

'You can get to know a person's resilience in times of trouble. ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a person who experiences
loss of family, wealth, or health. But they don't reflect: 'Worldly life
is like that. Reincarnation in a life-form is like that. That's why the
eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world
revolves around the eight worldly conditions: gain and loss, fame and
disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure and pain.' They sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion.

Take another person who experiences loss of family, wealth, or health.
But they reflect: 'Worldly life is like that. Reincarnation in a
life-form is like that. That's why the eight worldly conditions revolve
around the world, and the world revolves around the eight worldly
conditions: gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and praise, pleasure
and pain.' They don't sorrow or wail or lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. That's why I said that you can get to know a
person's resilience in times of trouble. ...

'You can get to know a person's wisdom by discussion. But only after a
long time, not casually; only when attentive, not when inattentive; and
only by the wise, not the witless.' That's what I said, but why did I
say it? Take a person who is discussing with someone else. They come to
know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what they're getting at,
and by how they discuss a question, they're witless, not wise. Why is
that? This venerable does not bring up a deep and meaningful saying that
is peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible
to the astute. When this venerable speaks on Dhamma they're not able to
explain the meaning, either briefly or in detail. They can't teach it,
assert it, establish it, clarify it, analyze it, or reveal it. This
venerable is witless, not wise.'

Suppose a person with clear eyes was standing on the bank of a lake.
They'd see a little fish rising, and think: 'Judging by this fish's
approach, by the ripples it makes, and by its force, it's a little fish,
not a big one.' In the same way, a person who is discussing with someone
else would come to know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what
they're getting at, and by how they discuss a question, they're witless,
not wise. ...'

Take another person who is discussing with someone else. They come to
know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what they're getting at,
and by how they discuss a question, they're wise, not witless. Why is
that? This venerable brings up a deep and meaningful saying that is
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute. When this venerable speaks on Dhamma they're able to explain
the meaning, either briefly or in detail. They teach it, assert it,
establish it, clarify it, analyze it, and reveal it. This venerable is
wise, not witless.'

Suppose a man with clear eyes was standing on the bank of a lake. He'd
see a big fish rising, and think: 'Judging by this fish's approach, by
the ripples it makes, and by its force, it's a big fish, not a little
one.' In the same way, a person who is discussing with someone else
would come to know: 'Judging by this venerable's approach, by what
they're getting at, and by how they articulate a question, they're wise,
not witless. ...'

That's why I said that you can get to know a person's wisdom by
discussion. But only after a long time, not casually; only when
attentive, not when inattentive; and only by the wise, not the witless.

These are the four things that can be known in four situations."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.193 With Bhaddiya *Bhaddiyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then Bhaddiya the Licchavi
went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'The ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a
conversion magic, and uses it to convert the disciples of those of other
religions.' I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has
said, and do not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation
in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal
and criticism?"

"Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by lineage,
don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't rely on
logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of thought,
don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't go by the
appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our respected
teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does greed come up in a person for their
welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A greedy individual---overcome by greed---kills living creatures,
steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is
that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does hate ... or delusion ... or
aggression come up in a person for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"An aggressive individual kills living creatures, steals, commits
adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that for their
lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, Bhaddiya, when we said: 'Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, Bhaddiya, don't rely on oral transmission ... But when you know
for yourselves: 'These things are skillful, blameless, praised by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness', then you should acquire them and keep them.

What do you think, Bhaddiya? Does contentment ... love ... understanding
... benevolence come up in a person for their welfare or harm?"

"Welfare, sir."

"An individual who is benevolent---not overcome by aggression---doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others
to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddiya, are these things skillful or unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, Bhaddiya, when we said: 'Please, Bhaddiya, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible
people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness", then you should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

The good and true persons in the world encourage their disciples:
'Please, mister, live rid of greed. Then you won't act out of greed by
way of body, speech, or mind. Live rid of hate ... delusion ...
aggression. Then you won't act out of hate ... delusion ... aggression
by way of body, speech, or mind."

When he said this, Bhaddiya the Licchavi said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay
follower who has gone for refuge for life."

"Well, Bhaddiya, did I say to you: 'Please, Bhaddiya, be my disciple,
and I will be your teacher'?"

"No, sir."

"Though I state and assert this, certain ascetics and brahmins
misrepresent me with the incorrect, hollow, false, untruthful claim:
'The ascetic Gotama is a magician. He knows a conversion magic, and uses
it to convert the disciples of those of other religions.'"

"Sir, this conversion magic is excellent. This conversion magic is
lovely! If my loved ones---relatives and kin---were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

"That's so true, Bhaddiya! That's so true, Bhaddiya! If all the
aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and menials were to be converted by
this, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. If the whole
world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---were to be
converted by this, for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities, it would be for their lasting welfare and happiness.
If these great sal trees were to be converted by this, for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities, it would be for
their lasting welfare and happiness---if they were sentient. How much
more then a human being!"

<!--pg-->
### N 4.194 At Sāpūga *Sāmugiyasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying in the land of the Koliyans,
where they have a town named Sāpūga. Then several Koliyans
from Sāpūga went up to Ānanda, bowed, and sat down to one
side. Then Venerable Ānanda said to them:

"Byagghapajjas, these four factors of trying to be pure have been
rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment. What
four? The factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind, view, and
freedom.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in ethics? It's when a
mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger
in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is
called purity of ethics. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of
ethics, or, if it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every
situation by wisdom.' Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called
the factor of trying to be pure in ethics.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in mind? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ...
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is
called purity of mind. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of mind,
or, if it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by
wisdom.' Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor,
perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the
factor of trying to be pure in mind.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in view? Take a mendicant
who truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called
purity of view. They think: 'I will fulfill such purity of view, or, if
it's already fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by wisdom.'
Their enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the factor of trying
to be pure in view.

And what is the factor of trying to be pure in freedom? That noble
disciple---who has these factors of trying to be pure in ethics, mind,
and view---detaches their mind from things that arouse greed, and frees
their mind from things that it should be freed from. Doing so, they
experience perfect freedom. This is called purity of freedom. They
think: 'I will fulfill such purity of freedom, or, if it's already
fulfilled, I'll support it in every situation by wisdom.' Their
enthusiasm for that---their effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness---is called the factor of trying
to be pure in freedom.

These four factors of trying to be pure have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get
past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover
the system, and to realize extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.195 With Vappa *Vappasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Vappa of the Sakyans, a
disciple of the Jains, went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna,
bowed, and sat down to one side. Mahāmoggallāna said to
him:

"Vappa, take a person who, due to the fading away of ignorance and the
arising of knowledge, is restrained in body, speech, and mind. Do you
see any reason why defilements giving rise to painful feelings would
defile that person in the next life?"

"Sir, I do see such a case. Take a person who did bad deeds in a past
life. But the result of that has not yet ripened. For this reason
defilements giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person in
the next life." But this conversation between
Mahāmoggallāna and Vappa was left unfinished.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall. He sat down on the seat spread out, and said to
Mahāmoggallāna, "Moggallāna, what were you
sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"

Moggallāna repeated the entire conversation to the Buddha,
and concluded: "This was my conversation with Vappa that was unfinished
when the Buddha arrived."

Then the Buddha said to Vappa, "Vappa, we can discuss this. But only if
you allow what should be allowed, and reject what should be rejected.
And if you ask me the meaning of anything you don't understand, saying:
'Sir, why is this? What's the meaning of that?'"

"Sir, let us discuss this. I will do as you say."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating bodily activity. These
don't occur in someone who refrains from such bodily activity. They
don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by
experiencing their results little by little. This wearing away is
apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. Do you see any reason why defilements giving rise to painful
feelings would defile that person in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating verbal activity. These
don't occur in someone who refrains from such verbal activity. They
don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by
experiencing their results little by little. This wearing away is
apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. Do you see any reason why defilements giving rise to painful
feelings would defile that person in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of instigating mental activity. These
don't occur in someone who refrains from such mental activity. They
don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by
experiencing their results little by little. This wearing away is
apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. Do you see any reason why defilements giving rise to painful
feelings would defile that person in the next life?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Vappa? There are distressing and feverish
defilements that arise because of ignorance. These don't occur when
ignorance fades away and knowledge arises. They don't perform any new
deeds, and old deeds are eliminated by experiencing their results little
by little. This wearing away is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves. Do you see any reason why defilements
giving rise to painful feelings would defile that person in the next
life?"

"No, sir."

"A mendicant whose mind is rightly freed like this has achieved six
consistent responses. Seeing a sight with the eye, they're neither happy
nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with
the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with
the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with
the mind, they're neither happy nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful
and aware. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: 'I
feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has come to an end,
everything that's felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right
here.'

Suppose there was a shadow cast by a post. Then along comes a person
with a spade and basket. They cut down the post at its base, dig it up,
and pull it out by its roots, right down to the fibers and stems. Then
they split it apart, cut up the parts, and chop them into splinters.
Next they dry the splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire,
and reduce them to ashes. Then they sweep away the ashes in a strong
wind, or float them away down a swift stream. And so the shadow cast by
the post is cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated,
and unable to arise in the future.

In the same way, a mendicant whose mind is rightly freed like this has
achieved six consistent responses. Seeing a sight with the eye, they're
neither happy nor sad, but remain equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing
a sound with the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a
flavor with the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an
idea with the mind, they're neither happy nor sad, but remain
equanimous, mindful and aware. Feeling the end of the body approaching,
they understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the
end of life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life
approaching.' They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life has
come to an end, everything that's felt, being no longer relished, will
become cool right here.'"

When he said this, Vappa the Sakyan, the disciple of the Jains, said to
the Buddha:

"Sir, suppose there was a man who raised commercial horses for profit.
But he never made any profit, and instead just got weary and frustrated.
In the same way, I paid homage to those Jain fools for profit. But I
never made any profit, and instead just got weary and frustrated. From
this day forth, any confidence I had in those Jain fools I sweep away as
in a strong wind, or float away as down a swift stream.

Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.196 With Sāḷha *Sāḷhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then Sāḷha
and Abhaya the Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who advocate crossing the
flood by means of two things: purification of ethics, and mortification
in disgust of sin. What does the Buddha say about this?"

"Sāḷha, purification of ethics is one of the factors of the
ascetic life, I say. But those ascetics and brahmins who teach fervent
mortification in disgust of sin---regarding it as essential and sticking
to it---are incapable of crossing the flood. And those ascetics and
brahmins whose livelihood and behavior by way of body, speech, and mind,
is not pure are also incapable of knowing and seeing, of supreme
awakening.

Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood.
There he'd see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free
of defects. He'd cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and
completely strip off the branches and foliage. Then he'd trim it with
axes and machetes, plane it, and sand it with a rock. Finally, he'd
launch out on the river.

What do you think, Sāḷha? Is that man capable of crossing
the river?"

"No, sir. Why not? Because that green sal tree is well worked on the
outside, but inside it's still not cleared out. I'd expect that green
sal tree to sink, and the man to come to ruin."

"In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who
teach fervent mortification in disgust of sin---regarding it as
essential and sticking to it---are incapable of crossing the flood. And
those ascetics and brahmins whose livelihood and behavior by way of
body, speech, and mind is not pure are also incapable of knowing and
seeing, of supreme awakening.

But those ascetics and brahmins who don't teach mortification in disgust
of sin---not regarding it as essential or sticking to it---are capable
of crossing the flood. And those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by
way of body, speech, and mind is pure are also capable of knowing and
seeing, of supreme awakening.

Suppose a man who wanted to cross a river took a sharp axe into a wood.
There he'd see a large green sal tree, straight and young and grown free
of defects. He'd cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and
completely strip off the branches and foliage. Then he'd trim it with
axes and machetes. Then he'd take a chisel and completely clear it out
inside. Then he'd plane it, sand it with a rock, and make it into a
boat. Finally he'd fix it with oars and rudder, and launch out on the
river.

What do you think, Sāḷha? Is that man capable of crossing
the river?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because that green sal tree is well worked on
the outside, cleared out on the inside, made into a boat, and fixed with
oars and rudder. I'd expect that boat to not sink, and the man to safely
make it to the far shore."

"In the same way, Sāḷha, those ascetics and brahmins who
don't teach fervent mortification in disgust of sin---not regarding it
as essential or sticking to it---are capable of crossing the flood. And
those ascetics and brahmins whose behavior by way of body, speech, and
mind is pure are also capable of knowing and seeing, of supreme
awakening. Suppose there was a warrior who knew lots of fancy archery
tricks. It is only with these three factors that he becomes worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
three? He's a long-distance shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters
large objects.

Just as a warrior is a long-distance shooter, a noble disciple has right
immersion. A noble disciple with right immersion truly sees any kind of
form at all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or
subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'
They truly see any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

Just as a warrior is a marksman, a noble disciple has right view. A
noble disciple with right view truly understands: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'.

Just as a warrior shatters large objects, a noble disciple has right
freedom. A noble disciple with right freedom shatters the great mass of
ignorance."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.197 Queen Mallikā *Mallikādevīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Queen
Mallikā went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why in this life some
females are ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; and poor, with few
assets and possessions; and insignificant?

And why are some females ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; but rich,
affluent, wealthy, and illustrious?

And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty; but poor, with few assets and possessions; and insignificant?

And why are some females attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty; and rich, affluent, wealthy, and illustrious?"

"Take a female who is irritable and bad-tempered. Even when criticized a
little bit she loses her temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and
hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and bitterness. She
doesn't give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. And she's jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the
possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to
others. If she comes back to this place after passing away, wherever she
is reborn she's ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; and poor, with few
assets and possessions; and insignificant.

Take another female who is irritable and bad-tempered. ... But she does
give to ascetics or brahmins ... And she's not jealous ... If she comes
back to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn she's
ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking; but rich, affluent, wealthy, and
illustrious.

Take another female who isn't irritable and bad-tempered. ... But she
doesn't give to ascetics or brahmins ... And she's jealous ... If she
comes back to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn
she's attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; but poor,
with few assets and possessions; and insignificant.

Take another female who isn't irritable and bad-tempered. ... She gives
to ascetics and brahmins ... And she's not jealous ... If she comes back
to this place after passing away, wherever she is reborn she's
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty; and rich,
affluent, wealthy, and illustrious.

This is why some females are ugly ... and poor ... and insignificant.
And some females are ugly ... but rich ... and illustrious. And some
females are attractive ... but poor ... and insignificant. And some
females are attractive ... and rich ... and illustrious."

When this was said, Queen Mallikā said to the Buddha:

"Sir, in another life I must have been irritable and bad-tempered. Even
when lightly criticized I must have lost my temper, becoming annoyed,
hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. For now I am ugly, unattractive, and bad-looking.

In another life I must have given to ascetics or brahmins such things as
food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and
bed, house, and lighting. For now I am rich, affluent, and wealthy.

In another life, I must not have been jealous, envying, resenting, and
begrudging the possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and
veneration given to others. For now I am illustrious. In this royal
court I command maidens of the aristocrats, brahmins, and householders.
So, sir, from this day forth I will not be irritable and bad-tempered.
Even when heavily criticized I won't lose my temper, become annoyed,
hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. I
will give to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink, clothing,
vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and lighting.
I will not be jealous, envying, resenting, and begrudging the
possessions, honor, respect, reverence, homage, and veneration given to
others.

Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a
lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.198 Fervent Mortification of Oneself *Attantapasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of mortifying
    themselves.

2.  One person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying
    others.

3.  One person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of
    mortifying themselves and others.

4.  One person neither mortifies themselves nor others, pursuing the
    practice of not mortifying themselves or others. They live without
    wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with
    self become divine.

And how does one person mortify themselves, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves? It's when someone goes naked, ignoring
conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when called.
They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on their
behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything from a
pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a
shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there is a
woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where
there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or
beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. They go to just one house
for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up
to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two
saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once
every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a
fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at set
intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
hair and beard, pursuing this practice. They constantly stand, refusing
seats. They squat, committed to the endeavor of squatting. They lie on a
mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed. They're devoted to
ritual bathing three times a day, including the evening. And so they
live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and tormenting the body.
That's how one person mortifies themselves, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves.

And how does one person mortify others, pursuing the practice of
mortifying others? It's when a person is a slaughterer of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, a hunter or fisher, a bandit, an executioner, a
butcher of cattle, a jailer, or has some other cruel livelihood. That's
how one person mortifies others, pursuing the practice of mortifying
others.

And how does one person mortify themselves and others, pursuing the
practice of mortifying themselves and others? It's when a person is an
anointed aristocratic king or a well-to-do brahmin. He has a new
ceremonial hall built to the east of the citadel. He shaves off his hair
and beard, dresses in a rough antelope hide, and smears his body with
ghee and oil. Scratching his back with antlers, he enters the hall with
his chief queen and the brahmin high priest. There he lies on the bare
ground strewn with grass. The king feeds on the milk from one teat of a
cow that has a calf of the same color. The chief queen feeds on the milk
from the second teat. The brahmin high priest feeds on the milk from the
third teat. The milk from the fourth teat is served to the sacred flame.
The calf feeds on the remainder. He says: 'Slaughter this many bulls,
bullocks, heifers, goats, rams, and horses for the sacrifice! Fell this
many trees and reap this much grass for the sacrificial equipment!' His
bondservants, servants, and workers do their jobs under threat of
punishment and danger, weeping, with tearful faces. That's how one
person mortifies themselves and others, pursuing the practice of
mortifying themselves and others.

And how does one person neither mortify themselves nor others, pursuing
the practice of not mortifying themselves or others, living without
wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing bliss, with
self become divine? It's when a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized
with his own insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and
divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---and he makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that
is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. A householder hears that teaching, or a
householder's child, or someone reborn in a good family. They gain faith
in the Realized One and reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty,
life gone forth is wide open. It's not easy for someone living at home
to lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.
Why don't I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness?' After some time they give up a
large or small fortune, and a large or small family circle. They shave
off hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings. They give up stealing. They take only what's given,
and expect only what's given. They keep themselves clean by not
thieving. They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. They give up lying. They speak the truth
and stick to the truth. They're honest and dependable, and don't trick
the world with their words. They give up divisive speech. They don't
repeat in one place what they heard in another so as to divide people
against each other. Instead, they reconcile those who are divided,
supporting unity, delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words
that promote harmony. They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way
that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite,
likable, and agreeable to the people. They give up talking nonsense.
Their words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching
and training. They say things at the right time which are valuable,
reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the
day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They
refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They refrain
from beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and
makeup. They refrain from high and luxurious beds. They refrain from
receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and girls, male
and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants,
cows, horses, and mares, and fields and land. They refrain from running
errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights, metals, or
measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder,
abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

Seeing a sight with the eyes, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. Hearing a sound with
the ears ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with
the tongue ... Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with
the mind, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving
restraint over it. When they have this noble sense restraint, they
experience an unsullied bliss inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble
contentment, this noble sense restraint, and this noble mindfulness and
situational awareness, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness,
the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground,
a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, they return
from almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence. Giving up covetousness for the
world, they meditate with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the
mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and malevolence, they meditate
with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings,
cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up dullness and drowsiness, they
meditate with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light,
mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving
up restlessness and remorse, they meditate without restlessness, their
mind peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse.
Giving up doubt, they meditate having gone beyond doubt, not undecided
about skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. They give up
these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom.
Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection
of past lives ... knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings
... knowledge of the ending of defilements. They truly understand: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements'
... 'This is the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of
defilements' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
defilements'.

Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' That's how one person neither mortifies themselves nor
others, pursuing the practice of not mortifying themselves or others,
living without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled, experiencing
bliss, with self become divine.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.199 Craving, the Weaver *Taṇhāsutta*

The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you about craving---the weaver, the migrant,
the creeping, the clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it.
It makes the world tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and
matted like rushes and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad
places, the underworld, transmigration. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is that craving ...? There are eighteen currents of craving
that derive from the interior, and eighteen that derive from the
exterior.

What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior?
When there is the concept 'I am', there are the concepts 'I am such', 'I
am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine',
'such is mine', 'thus is mine', 'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such
is also mine', 'thus is also mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will
be', 'I will be such', 'I will be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. These
are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior.

What are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the exterior?
When there is the concept 'I am because of this', there are the concepts
'I am such because of this', 'I am thus because of this', 'I am
otherwise because of this'; 'I am fleeting because of this', 'I am
lasting because of this'; 'mine because of this', 'such is mine because
of this', 'thus is mine because of this', 'otherwise is mine because of
this'; 'also mine because of this', 'such is also mine because of this',
'thus is also mine because of this', 'otherwise is also mine because of
this'; 'I will be because of this', 'I will be such because of this', 'I
will be thus because of this', 'I will be otherwise because of this'.
These are the eighteen currents of craving that derive from the
exterior.

So there are eighteen currents of craving that derive from the interior,
and eighteen that derive from the exterior. These are called the
thirty-six currents of craving. Each of these pertain to the past,
future, and present, making one hundred and eight currents of craving.

This is that craving---the weaver, the migrant, the creeping, the
clinging. This world is choked by it, engulfed by it. It makes the world
tangled like yarn, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes
and reeds, not escaping the places of loss, the bad places, the
underworld, transmigration."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.200 Love and Hate *Pemasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are born of love and hate. What four?

1.  Love is born of love,

2.  hate is born of love,

3.  love is born of hate, and

4.  hate is born of hate.

And how is love born of love? It's when someone likes, loves, and cares
for a person. Others treat that person with liking, love, and care. They
think: 'These others like the person I like.' And so love for them
springs up. That's how love is born of love.

And how is hate born of love? It's when someone likes, loves, and cares
for a person. Others treat that person with disliking, loathing, and
detestation. They think: 'These others dislike the person I like.' And
so hate for them springs up. That's how hate is born of love.

And how is love born of hate? It's when someone dislikes, loathes, and
detests a person. Others treat that person with disliking, loathing, and
detestation. They think: 'These others dislike the person I dislike.'
And so love for them springs up. That's how love is born of hate.

And how is hate born of hate? It's when someone dislikes, loathes, and
detests a person. Others treat that person with liking, love, and care.
They think: 'These others like the person I dislike.' And so hate for
them springs up. That's how hate is born of hate.

These are the four things that are born of love and hate.

A time comes when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the first
absorption. At that time they have no love born of love, hate born of
love, love born of hate, or hate born of hate.

A time comes when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. At that time they
have no love born of love, hate born of love, love born of hate, or hate
born of hate.

A time comes when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. At that time
any love born of love, hate born of love, love born of hate, or hate
born of hate is given up, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. This is called a
mendicant who doesn't draw close or push back or fume or ignite or burn
up.

And how does a mendicant draw close? It's when a mendicant regards form
as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard
feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in self, or self in
feeling. They regard perception as self, self as having perception,
perception in self, or self in perception. They regard choices as self,
self as having choices, choices in self, or self in choices. They regard
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness. That's how a mendicant draws close.

And how does a mendicant not draw close? It's when a mendicant doesn't
regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
They don't regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in
self, or self in feeling. They don't regard perception as self, self as
having perception, perception in self, or self in perception. They don't
regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in self, or self
in choices. They don't regard consciousness as self, self as having
consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's
how a mendicant doesn't draw close.

And how does a mendicant push back? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with a mendicant, and the mendicant abuses, annoys, or argues
back at them. That's how a mendicant pushes back.

And how does a mendicant not push back? It's when someone abuses,
annoys, or argues with a mendicant, and the mendicant doesn't abuse,
annoy, or argue back at them. That's how a mendicant doesn't push back.

And how does a mendicant fume? When there is the concept 'I am', there
are the concepts 'I am such', 'I am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am
fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine', 'such is mine', 'thus is mine',
'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such is also mine', 'thus is also
mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will be', 'I will be such', 'I will
be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. That's how a mendicant fumes.

And how does a mendicant not fume? When there is no concept 'I am',
there are no concepts 'I am such', 'I am thus', 'I am otherwise'; 'I am
fleeting', 'I am lasting'; 'mine', 'such is mine', 'thus is mine',
'otherwise is mine'; 'also mine', 'such is also mine', 'thus is also
mine', 'otherwise is also mine'; 'I will be', 'I will be such', 'I will
be thus', 'I will be otherwise'. That's how a mendicant doesn't fume.

And how is a mendicant ignited? When there is the concept 'I am because
of this', there are the concepts 'I am such because of this', 'I am thus
because of this', 'I am otherwise because of this'; 'I am fleeting
because of this', 'I am lasting because of this'; 'mine because of
this', 'such is mine because of this', 'thus is mine because of this',
'otherwise is mine because of this'; 'also mine because of this', 'such
is also mine because of this', 'thus is also mine because of this',
'otherwise is also mine because of this'; 'I will be because of this',
'I will be such because of this', 'I will be thus because of this', 'I
will be otherwise because of this'. That's how a mendicant is ignited.

And how is a mendicant not ignited? When there is no concept 'I am
because of this', there are no concepts 'I am such because of this', 'I
am thus because of this', 'I am otherwise because of this'; 'I am
fleeting because of this', 'I am lasting because of this'; 'mine because
of this', 'such is mine because of this', 'thus is mine because of
this', 'otherwise is mine because of this'; 'also mine because of this',
'such is also mine because of this', 'thus is also mine because of
this', 'otherwise is also mine because of this'; 'I will be because of
this', 'I will be such because of this', 'I will be thus because of
this', 'I will be otherwise because of this'. That's how a mendicant is
not ignited.

And how does a mendicant burn up? It's when a mendicant hasn't given up
the conceit 'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is burned up.

And how does a mendicant not burn up? It's when a mendicant has given up
the conceit 'I am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant is not burned up."


