# The Chapter on Practice


### N 4.161 In Brief *Saṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.162 In Detail *Vitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

And what's the painful practice with slow insight? It's when someone is
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They often feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with slow insight.

And what's the painful practice with swift insight? It's when someone is
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They often feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. And these five
faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with swift insight.

And what's pleasant practice with slow insight? It's when someone is not
ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They rarely feel the
pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the pleasant practice with slow insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with swift insight? It's when someone
is not ordinarily full of acute greed, hate, and delusion. They rarely
feel the pain and sadness that greed, hate, and delusion bring. These
five faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.163 Ugly *Asubhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

And what's the painful practice with slow insight? It's when a mendicant
meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established
the perception of their own death. They rely on these five powers of a
trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five
faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with slow insight.

And what's the painful practice with swift insight? It's when a
mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well established
the perception of their own death. They rely on these five powers of a
trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. And these five
faculties manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they swiftly attain the
conditions for ending the defilements in the present life. This is
called the painful practice with swift insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with slow insight? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five faculties
manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. Because of this, they only slowly attain the conditions for
ending the defilements in the present life. This is called the pleasant
practice with slow insight.

And what's the pleasant practice with swift insight? It's when a
mendicant ... enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They rely on
these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. And these five faculties manifest in them strongly: faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of this, they
swiftly attain the conditions for ending the defilements in the present
life. This is called the pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.164 Patient (1st) *Paṭhamakhamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four? Impatient
practice, patient practice, taming practice, and calming practice.

And what's the impatient practice? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with you, and you abuse, annoy, or argue right back at them. This
is called the impatient practice.

And what's the patient practice? It's when someone abuses, annoys, or
argues with you, and you don't abuse, annoy, or argue back at them. This
is called the patient practice.

And what's the taming practice? When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
restraint over it. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When they
smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with their
tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they know an
idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of mind,
and achieving restraint over it. This is called the taming practice.

And what's the calming practice? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called the
calming practice.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.165 Patience (2nd) *Dutiyakhamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four? Impatient
practice, patient practice, taming practice, and calming practice.

And what's the impatient practice? It's when someone cannot endure cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst. They cannot endure the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. They cannot endure rude and
unwelcome criticism. And they cannot put up with physical pain---sharp,
severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening. This is
called the impatient practice.

And what's the patient practice? It's when someone endures cold, heat,
hunger, and thirst. They endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind,
sun, and reptiles. They endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And they
put up with physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening. This is called the patient practice.

And what's the taming practice? When a mendicant sees a sight with their
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. ... When
they hear a sound with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their
nose ... When they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a
touch with their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they
don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind
were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice
restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over
it. This is called the taming practice.

And what's the calming practice? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called the
calming practice.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.166 Both *Ubhayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

Of these, the painful practice with slow insight is said to be inferior
in both ways: because it's painful and because it's slow. This practice
is said to be inferior in both ways.

The painful practice with swift insight is said to be inferior because
it's painful.

The pleasant practice with slow insight is said to be inferior because
it's slow.

The pleasant practice with swift insight is said to be superior in both
ways: because it's pleasant, and because it's swift. This practice is
said to be superior in both ways.

These are the four ways of practice."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.167 Moggallāna's Practice *Mahāmoggallānasutta*

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, Sāriputta sat
down to one side and said to Mahāmoggallāna:

"Reverend Moggallāna, there are four ways of practice. What
four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice. Which one of these four ways of
practice did you rely on to free your mind from defilements by not
grasping?"

"Reverend Sāriputta ... I relied on the painful practice
with swift insight to free my mind from defilements by not grasping."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.168 Sāriputta's Practice *Sāriputtasutta*

Then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna went up to Venerable
Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, Mahāmoggallāna
sat down to one side, and said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, there are four ways of practice. What
four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice. Which one of these four ways of
practice did you rely on to free your mind from defilements by not
grasping?"

"Reverend Moggallāna ... I relied on the pleasant practice
with swift insight to free my mind from defilements by not grasping."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.169 Extra Effort *Sasaṅkhārasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person is fully extinguished in this very life by making extra
    effort.

2.  One person is fully extinguished when the body breaks up by making
    extra effort.

3.  One person is fully extinguished in this very life without making
    extra effort.

4.  One person is fully extinguished when the body breaks up without
    making extra effort.

And how is a person fully extinguished in this very life by making extra
effort? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the
body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction
with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and
has well established the perception of their own death. They rely on
these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. And these five faculties manifest in them strongly: faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of the strength of
the five faculties, they are fully extinguished in this very life by
making extra effort. That's how a person is fully extinguished in this
very life by making extra effort.

How is a person fully extinguished when the body breaks up by making
extra effort? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of
the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction
with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and
has well established the perception of their own death. They rely on
these five powers of a trainee: faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. But these five faculties manifest in them weakly: faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. Because of the weakness of the five
faculties, they are fully extinguished when the body breaks up by making
extra effort. That's how a person is fully extinguished when the body
breaks up by making extra effort.

And how is a person fully extinguished in this very life without making
extra effort? It's when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. And these five faculties
manifest in them strongly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. Because of the strength of the five faculties, they are fully
extinguished in this very life without making extra effort. That's how a
person is fully extinguished in this very life without making extra
effort.

And how is a person fully extinguished when the body breaks up without
making extra effort? It's when a mendicant ... enters and remains in the
first absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... They rely on these five powers of a trainee: faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. But these five faculties
manifest in them weakly: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. Because of the weakness of the five faculties, they are fully
extinguished when the body breaks up without making extra effort. That's
how a person is fully extinguished when the body breaks up without
making extra effort.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.170 In Conjunction *Yuganaddhasutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. There Ānanda
addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, all of the monks and nuns who declare in my presence that
they have attained perfection, did so by one or other of four paths.

What four?

Take a mendicant who develops serenity before discernment. As they do
so, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of
it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

Another mendicant develops discernment before serenity. As they do so,
the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it.
By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

Another mendicant develops serenity and discernment in conjunction. As
they do so, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make
much of it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the
underlying tendencies.

Another mendicant's mind is seized by restlessness to realize the
teaching. But there comes a time when their mind is stilled internally;
it settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi. The
path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By
doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

All of the monks and nuns who declare in my presence that they have
attained perfection, did so by one or other of these four paths."

