# The Chapter on Brightness


### N 4.141 Brightness *Ābhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of brightness. What four? The
brightness of the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds
of brightness. The best of these four kinds of brightness is the
brightness of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.142 Radiance *Pabhāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of radiance. What four? The
radiance of the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds of
radiance. The best of these four kinds of radiance is the radiance of
wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.143 Light *Ālokasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four lights. What four? The lights of the
moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four lights. The best of
these four lights is the light of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.144 Shining *Obhāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are four kinds of shining. What four? The shining of
the moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four kinds of shining.
The best of these four kinds of shining is the shining of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.145 Lamps *Pajjotasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four lamps. What four? The lamps of the
moon, sun, fire, and wisdom. These are the four lamps. The best of these
four lamps is the lamp of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.146 Times (1st) *Paṭhamakālasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four times. What four? A time for listening
to the teaching, a time for discussing the teaching, a time for
serenity, and a time for discernment. These are the four times."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.147 Times (2nd) *Dutiyakālasutta*

"Mendicants, when these four times are rightly developed and progressed,
they gradually lead to the ending of defilements. What four? A time for
listening to the teaching, a time for discussing the teaching, a time
for serenity, and a time for discernment.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean.

In the same way, when these four times are rightly developed and
progressed, they gradually lead to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.148 Bad Conduct *Duccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.
What four? Speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. These
are the four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.149 Good Conduct *Sucaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of good conduct by way of
speech. What four? Speech that's true, harmonious, gentle, and
thoughtful. These are the four kinds of good conduct by way of speech."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.150 Essentials *Sārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four essentials. What four? Ethics,
immersion, wisdom, and freedom are essentials. These are the four
essentials."


