# The Chapter on Persons


### AN 4.131 Fetters *Saṁyojanasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person hasn't given up the lower fetters, the fetters for
    getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence.

2.  One person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for
    getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence.

3.  One person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for
    getting reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued
    existence.

4.  One person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
    reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence.

What person hasn't given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? A
once-returner. This is the person who hasn't given up the lower fetters,
the fetters for getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued
existence.

What person has given up the lower fetters, but not the fetters for
getting reborn, or the fetters for getting a continued existence? One
heading upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

What person has given up the lower fetters and the fetters for getting
reborn, but not the fetters for getting a continued existence? One
extinguished between one life and the next.

What person has given up the lower fetters, the fetters for getting
reborn, and the fetters for getting a continued existence? A perfected
one.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.132 Eloquence *Paṭibhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who speaks on topic, but not fluently.

2.  One who speaks fluently, but not on topic.

3.  One who speaks on topic and fluently.

4.  One who speaks neither on topic nor fluently.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.133 One Who Understands Immediately *Ugghaṭitaññūsutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? One
who understands immediately, one who understands after detailed
explanation, one who needs education, and one who merely learns by rote.
These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.134 The Fruits of Initiative *Uṭṭhānaphalasutta*

"These four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One who lives off the fruit of initiative, but not deeds;

2.  one who lives off the fruit of deeds, but not initiative;

3.  one who lives off the fruit of both deeds and initiative;

4.  one who lives off the fruit of neither initiative nor deeds.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.135 Blameworthy *Sāvajjasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? The
blameworthy, the mostly blameworthy, the slightly blameworthy, and the
blameless.

And how is a person blameworthy? It's when a person does things by way
of body, speech, and mind that are blameworthy. That's how a person is
blameworthy.

And how is a person mostly blameworthy? It's when a person does things
by way of body, speech, and mind that are mostly blameworthy, but
occasionally blameless. That's how a person is mostly blameworthy.

And how is a person slightly blameworthy? It's when a person does things
by way of body, speech, and mind that are mostly blameless, but
occasionally blameworthy. That's how a person is slightly blameworthy.

And how is a person blameless? It's when a person does things by way of
body, speech, and mind that are blameless. That's how a person is
blameless.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.136 Ethics (1st) *Paṭhamasīlasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four? One
person has not fulfilled ethics, immersion, or wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics, but not immersion or wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics and immersion, but not wisdom.

One person has fulfilled ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.137 Ethics (2nd) *Dutiyasīlasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One person doesn't value or submit to ethics, immersion, or wisdom.

2.  One person values and submits to ethics, but not to immersion or
    wisdom.

3.  One person values and submits to ethics and immersion, but not
    wisdom.

4.  One person values and submits to ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.138 Retreat *Nikaṭṭhasutta*

"Mendicants, these four people are found in the world. What four?

1.  One is on retreat in body, but not mind;

2.  one is on retreat in mind, but not body;

3.  one is on retreat in neither body nor mind; and

4.  one is on retreat in both body and mind.

And how is a person on retreat in body, but not mind? It's when a person
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But they
think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. That's how a person is on
retreat in body, but not mind.

And how is a person on retreat in mind, but not body? It's when a person
doesn't frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But
they think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. That's
how a person is on retreat in mind, but not body.

And how is a person on retreat in neither body nor mind? It's when a
person doesn't frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. And they think sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. That's
how a person is on retreat in neither body nor mind.

And how is a person on retreat in both body and mind? It's when a person
frequents remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. And they
think thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. That's how
a person is on retreat in both body and mind.

These are the four people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.139 Dhamma Speakers *Dhammakathikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four Dhamma speakers. What four?

One Dhamma speaker speaks little and off topic. And their assembly can't
tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards such
a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks little but stays on topic. And their assembly
can tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards
such a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks much but off topic. And their assembly can't
tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards such
a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

One Dhamma speaker speaks much and stays on topic. And their assembly
can tell what's on topic and what's off topic. Such an assembly regards
such a Dhamma speaker simply as a Dhamma speaker.

These are the four Dhamma speakers."

<!--pg-->
### AN 4.140 Speaker *Vādīsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four speakers. What four?

1.  There's a speaker who runs out of meaningful things to say, but not
    of ways of phrasing things.

2.  There's a speaker who runs out of ways of phrasing things, but not
    of meaningful things to say.

3.  There's a speaker who runs out of both meaningful things to say, and
    ways of phrasing things.

4.  There's a speaker who never runs out of meaningful things to say, or
    ways of phrasing things.

These are the four speakers. It is impossible, it cannot happen that
someone accomplished in the four kinds of textual analysis will ever run
out of meaningful things to say, or ways of phrasing things."

