# The Chapter on Wilderness Dwellers

### AN 5.181 Wilderness Dwellers  *Āraññikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of wilderness dwellers. What
five? A person may be wilderness dweller because of stupidity and folly.
Or because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because
of madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas
and their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake
of contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are
the five kinds of wilderness dwellers. But the person who dwells in the
wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
dwells in the wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.182 Robes  *Cīvarasutta*

"Mendicants, these five wear rag robes. What five? A person may wear rag
robes because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it
is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake of having few wishes ...
These are the five who wear rag robes."

### AN 5.183 Dwelling at the Root of a Tree  *Rukkhamūlikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five who dwell at the root of a tree. What
five? A person may dwell at the root of a tree because of stupidity ...
corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ...
or for the sake of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell at
the root of a tree."

### AN 5.184 Charnel Ground Dwellers  *Sosānikasutta*

"Mendicants, these five dwell in a charnel ground. What five? A person
may dwell in a charnel ground because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes
... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake
of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell in a charnel
ground."

### AN 5.185 Open Air Dwellers  *Abbhokāsikasutta*

"These five dwell in the open air. ..."

### AN 5.186 Those Who Never Lie Down  *Nesajjikasutta*

"These five never lie down. ..."

### AN 5.187 Those Who Sleep Wherever a Mat is Laid  *Yathāsanthatikasutta*

"These five sleep wherever they lay their mat. ..."

### AN 5.188 Those Who Eat in One Sitting  *Ekāsanikasutta*

"These five eat in one sitting per day. ..."

### AN 5.189 Refusers of Late Food  *Khalupacchābhattikasutta*

"These five refuse to accept food offered after the meal has begun. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.190 Those Who Eat Only From the Almsbowl  *Pattapiṇḍikasutta*

"Mendicants, these five eat only from the almsbowl. What five? A person
may eat only from the almsbowl because of stupidity and folly. Or
because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of
madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas and
their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake of
contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are the
five kinds of people who eat only from the almsbowl. But the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

