# The Chapter on Long Wandering

### AN 5.221 Long Wandering (1st)  *Paṭhamadīghacārikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't learn new things. You don't
clarify what you've learned. You lack confidence in some things you have
learned. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You learn new things. You clarify what you've learned. You have
confidence in some things you have learned. You don't contract severe
illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits of a reasonable
amount of wandering."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.222 Long Wandering (2nd)  *Dutiyadīghacārikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't achieve the unachieved. What
you have achieved falls away. You lose confidence in some things you've
achieved. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You achieve the unachieved. What you have achieved doesn't fall
away. You're confident in some things you've achieved. You don't
contract severe illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits
of a reasonable amount of wandering."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.223 Overstaying  *Atinivāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You have a lot of stuff and store it up. You have a lot of medicine and
store it up. You have a lot of duties and responsibilities, and become
capable in whatever needs to be done. You mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. And when you
leave that monastery, you miss it. These are the five drawbacks of
overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You don't have a lot of stuff and store it up. You
don't have a lot of medicine and store it up. You don't have a lot of
duties and responsibilities, or become capable in whatever needs to be
done. You don't mix closely with laypeople and renunciates, socializing
inappropriately like a layperson. And when you leave that monastery, you
don't miss it. These are the five benefits of staying for a reasonable
length of time."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.224 Stingy  *Maccharīsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You become stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and
the teaching. These are the five drawbacks of overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You're not stingy with dwellings, families, material
things, praise, and the teaching. These are the five benefits of staying
for a reasonable length of time."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.225 Visiting Families (1st)  *Paṭhamakulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of visiting families. What
five? You fall into an offense for wandering without leave. You fall
into an offense for sitting in a private place with someone of the
opposite sex. You fall into an offense for sitting in a hidden place
with someone of the opposite sex. You fall into an offense for teaching
more than five or six sentences to someone of the opposite sex. You have
a lot of sensual thoughts. These are the five drawbacks of visiting
families."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.226 Visiting Families (2nd)  *Dutiyakulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a mendicant who visits
families for too long, mixing closely with them. What five? You often
see members of the opposite sex. Seeing them, you become close. Being so
close, you become intimate. Being intimate, lust overcomes you. When
your mind is swamped by lust, you can expect that you will lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit one of the corrupt offenses, or
resign the training and return to a lesser life. These are the five
drawbacks for a mendicant who visits families for too long, mixing
closely with them."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.227 Riches  *Bhogasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of riches. What five? Fire,
water, kings, thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share. These are the
five drawbacks of riches.

There are these five benefits of riches. What five? Riches enable you to
make yourself happy and pleased, to make your mother and father; your
children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff, and your friends
and colleagues happy and pleased, and to keep them all happy. And they
enable you to establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and
brahmins that's conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to
heaven. These are the five benefits of riches."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.228 Eating Late  *Ussūrabhattasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a family who takes their
meals late in the day. What five? When guests visit, they are not served
on time. The deities who accept spirit-offerings are not served on time.
Ascetics and brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night, and from food at the wrong time are not served on time.
Bondservants, workers, and staff do their duties neglectfully. A meal
eaten during the wrong period is not nutritious. These are the five
drawbacks for a family who takes their meals late in the day.

There are these five benefits for a family who takes their meals at a
proper time. What five? When guests visit, they are served on time. The
deities who accept spirit-offerings are served on time. Ascetics and
brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at
night, and from food at the wrong time are served on time. Bondservants,
workers, and staff do their duties attentively. A meal eaten during the
proper period is nutritious. These are the five benefits for a family
who takes their meals at a proper time."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.229 Black Snakes (1st)  *Paṭhamakaṇhasappasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are
the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are the
five drawbacks of a female."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.230 Black Snakes (2nd)  *Dutiyakaṇhasappasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous.
These are the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous. This is
a female's venom: usually she's very lustful. This is a female's forked
tongue: usually she speaks divisively. This is a female's treachery:
usually she's an adulteress. These are the five drawbacks of a female."

