# The Chapter on the True Teaching

### N 5.151 Surety in the Right Way (1st)  *Paṭhamasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They listen with scattered and disunified mind. They apply
the mind irrationally. Someone with these five qualities is unable to
enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when
listening to the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They listen
with unscattered and unified mind. They apply the mind rationally.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.152 Surety in the Right Way (2nd)  *Dutiyasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They're witless, dull, and idiotic. They think they know
what they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to
enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when
listening to the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They're wise,
bright, and clever. They don't think they know what they don't know.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.153 Surety in the Right Way (3rd)  *Tatiyasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They listen to the teaching bent only on putting it
down. They listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind.
They're antagonistic to the teacher, planning to attack them. They're
witless, dull, and idiotic. And they think they know what they don't
know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't listen to the teaching bent only on putting it down. They
don't listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They're
not antagonistic to the teacher, and not planning to attack them.
They're wise, bright, and clever. And they don't think they know what
they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the
sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.154 The Decline of the True Teaching (1st)  *Paṭhamasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants don't carefully
listen to the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They don't
carefully examine the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they
don't carefully practice in line with the meaning and the teaching
they've understood. These five things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants carefully listen to
the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They carefully examine
the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they carefully practice
in line with the meaning and the teaching they've understood. These five
things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.155 The Decline of the True Teaching (2nd)  *Dutiyasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants don't memorize the teaching---statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends,
stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the
first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants don't explain the teaching in detail to
others as they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't make others recite the teaching in
detail as they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't think about and consider the teaching
in their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize the teaching---statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the first thing
that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants explain the teaching in detail to others as
they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants make others recite the teaching in detail as
they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants think about and consider the teaching in
their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.156 The Decline of the True Teaching (3rd)  *Tatiyasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned
incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. This is the first
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that
make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take
instruction respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---don't carefully make others recite the discourses. When they
pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to
preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in
backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are indulgent
and slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, there's a schism in the Saṅgha. When the
Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and forsake
each other. This doesn't inspire confidence in those without it, and it
causes some with confidence to change their minds. This is the fifth
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when the mendicants memorize
discourses that have been learned correctly, with well placed words and
phrases. When the words and phrases are well organized, the meaning is
correctly interpreted. This is the first thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that
make them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---carefully make others recite the discourses. When they pass
away, the discourses aren't cut off at the root, and they have someone
to preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent and slack, leaders
in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They rouse energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, with one recitation. When
the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don't abuse, insult, block,
or forsake each other. This inspires confidence in those without it, and
increases confidence in those who have it. This is the fifth thing that
leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.157 Inappropriate Talk  *Dukkathāsutta*

"Mendicants, it is inappropriate to speak to five kinds of person by
comparing that person with someone else. What five?

It's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning. It's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity. It's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith?
When an unfaithful person is spoken to about faith they lose their
temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying
annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that faith in
themselves, they don't get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics?
When an unethical person is spoken to about ethics they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that ethical conduct in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about
learning? When an unlearned person is spoken to about learning they lose
their temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that learning in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity?
When a stingy person is spoken to about generosity they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that generosity in themselves, they
don't get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom?
When a witless person is spoken to about wisdom they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

It is inappropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else.

It is appropriate to speak to five kinds of person by comparing that
person with someone else. What five?

It's appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith. It's
appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct. It's
appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning. It's appropriate
to talk to a generous person about generosity. It's appropriate to talk
to a wise person about wisdom.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith? When
a faithful person is spoken to about faith they don't lose their temper,
they don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that faith in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's why it's appropriate
to talk to a faithful person about faith.

And why is it appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct? When an ethical person is spoken to about ethical conduct they
don't lose their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that ethical conduct in
themselves, they get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings.
That's why it's appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning?
When a learned person is spoken to about learning they don't lose their
temper ... Why is that? Seeing that learning in themselves, they get the
rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's appropriate to
talk to a learned person about learning.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity?
When a generous person is spoken to about generosity they don't lose
their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that generosity in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom? When a
wise person is spoken to about wisdom they don't lose their temper, they
don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom.

It is appropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.158 Timidity  *Sārajjasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is overcome by timidity.
What five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, unethical, with little
learning, lazy, and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is
overcome by timidity.

A mendicant with five qualities is self-assured. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and wise. A
mendicant with these five qualities is self-assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.159 With Udāyī  *Udāyīsutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Now, at that time
Venerable Udāyī was sitting teaching Dhamma, surrounded by
a large assembly of laypeople. Seeing this, Venerable Ānanda went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Udāyī is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a
large assembly of laypeople."

"Ānanda, it's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish
five things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others. What five?

You should teach Dhamma to others thinking: 'I will teach step by step.'
...

'I will teach showing my method.' ...

'I will teach out of kindness.' ...

'I will not teach while secretly hoping to profit.' ...

'I will teach without hurting myself or others.'

It's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish these five
things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.160 Hard to Get Rid Of  *Duppaṭivinodayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things are hard to get rid of once they've
arisen. What five? Greed, hate, delusion, the feeling of being inspired
to speak out, and thoughts of traveling. These five things are hard to
get rid of once they've arisen."

