# The Chapter on a Warrior

### AN 5.71 Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (1st)  *Paṭhamacetovimuttiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death. These five things, when
developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as
their fruit and benefit. When a mendicant has freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom, such a mendicant is one who is called 'one who has
lifted the cross-bar', 'one who has filled in the moat', 'one who has
pulled up the pillar', 'one who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one
with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached'.

And how has a mendicant lifted the cross-bar? It's when a mendicant has
given up ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has lifted the cross-bar.

And how has a mendicant filled in the moat? It's when a mendicant has
given up transmigrating through births in future lives, cut it off at
the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to
arise in the future. That's how a mendicant has filled in the moat.

And how has a mendicant pulled up the pillar? It's when a mendicant has
given up craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has pulled up the pillar.

And how is a mendicant unimpeded? It's when a mendicant has given up the
five lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm
stump, obliterated them, so they're unable to arise in the future.
That's how a mendicant is unimpeded.

And how is a mendicant a noble one with with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached? It's when a mendicant has given up the conceit 'I
am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it,
so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant is a noble
one with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.72 Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (2nd)  *Dutiyacetovimuttiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit. What
five?

The perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in
impermanence, the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of
giving up, and the perception of fading away.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

When a mendicant has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, such a
mendicant is one who is called 'one who has lifted the cross-bar', 'one
who has filled in the moat', 'one who has pulled up the pillar', 'one
who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.73 One Who Lives by the Teaching (1st)  *Paṭhamadhammavihārīsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They
spend too much time studying that teaching. They neglect retreat, and
are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That mendicant is
called one who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. They spend too much time advocating that
teaching. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal
serenity of heart. That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not
one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. They spend too much time reciting that teaching. They
neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart.
That mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. They spend too much time thinking about that teaching. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That
mendicant is called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They don't spend too much
time studying that teaching. They don't neglect retreat, and they're
committed to internal serenity of heart. That's how a mendicant is one
who lives by the teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.74 One Who Lives by the Teaching (2nd)  *Dutiyadhammavihārīsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But
they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is called one
who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning.
That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not one who lives by
the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That
mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is
called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And they do understand
the higher meaning. That's how a mendicant is one who lives by the
teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.75 Warriors (1st)  *Paṭhamayodhājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud
of dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some
warriors are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust, but he
falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's crest. He doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are
like that. This is the third warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
Some warriors are like that. This is the fourth warrior found in the
world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world.

These are the five warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five?

Firstly, one monk falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud of
dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life.
Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns
to a lesser life. What is his 'cloud of dust'? It's when a monk hears:
'In such and such a village or town there's a women or a girl who is
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' Hearing this,
he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'cloud of dust'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who falters and founders at
the mere sight of a cloud of dust. Some people are like that. This is
the first person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust, but at the mere
sight of a banner's crest he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm,
and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to
continue training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. What is
his 'banner's crest'? It's when a monk doesn't hear: 'In such and such a
village or town there's a women or a girl who is attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' But he sees for himself a
women or a girl who is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. Seeing her, he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and
fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue
training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. This is his
'banner's crest'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust, but he falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's
crest. Some people are like that. This is the second person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring
his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns to a
lesser life. What is his 'turmoil'? It's when a mendicant who has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is
approached by a female. She smiles, chats, laughs, and teases him. He
falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'turmoil'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest, but he falters and founders at the mere
sound of turmoil. Some people are like that. This is the third person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
What is his 'blows are struck'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached
by a female. She sits right by him, lies down, or embraces him. Without
resigning the training and declaring his inability to continue, he has
sex. This is his 'blows are struck'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil, but is killed or injured when
blows are struck. Some people are like that. This is the fourth person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. What is his 'victory in
battle'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a wilderness, or to the
root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached by a female. She sits
right by him, lies down, or embraces him. But he disentangles and frees
himself, and goes wherever he wants. He frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he
sits down cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes
mindfulness in his presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, he
meditates with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of
covetousness. Giving up ill will and malevolence, he meditates with a
mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing
the mind of ill will. Giving up dullness and drowsiness, he meditates
with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful
and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up
restlessness and remorse, he meditates without restlessness, his mind
peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving
up doubt, he meditates having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about
skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. He gives up these five
hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. He truly understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it is freed, he
knows it is freed.

He understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is his 'victory in battle'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins
victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some
people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a warrior
found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.76 Warriors (2nd)  *Dutiyayodhājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes kill him and finish him off. Some warriors
are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some warriors
are like that. This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. But he dies of his injuries
while in their care. Some warriors are like that. This is the third
warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. And while in their care, he
recovers from his injuries. Some warriors are like that. This is the
fourth warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world. These are the five
warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five? Firstly, a mendicant lives supported by a town or
village. He robes up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
enters a village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and
mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the
sense faculties. There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing
clothes. Lust infects his mind, and, without resigning the training and
declaring his inability to continue, he has sex.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is killed and finished
off by his foes. Some people are like that. This is the first person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' But while traveling on the
road, before he reaches the monastery he declares his inability to
continue training. He rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is taken to his relatives
for care, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some people
are like that. This is the second person similar to a warrior found
among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
similes of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'Reverends, even though the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give
little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all
the more full of drawbacks, I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I
declare my inability to continue training. I reject it and will return
to a lesser life.' Declaring his inability to continue training, he
rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who dies of his injuries
while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that. This is
the third person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
simile of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'I'll try, reverends, I'll struggle, I'll be happy. I won't now declare
my inability to continue training, reject it and return to a lesser
life.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who recovers from his
injuries while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that.
This is the fourth person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town, guarding body, speech, and mind, establishing mindfulness, and
restraining the sense faculties. Seeing a sight with his eyes, he
doesn't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, he practices
restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over
it. Hearing a sound with his ears ... Smelling an odor with his nose ...
Tasting a flavor with his tongue ... Feeling a touch with his body ...
Knowing an idea with his mind, he doesn't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, he practices restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. Then after the meal,
on his return from almsround, he frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. Gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down
cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes mindfulness in his
presence. He gives up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. He truly understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When freed, he knows 'it
is freed'. He understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has
been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who dons his sword and
shield, fastens his bow and arrows, and plunges into the thick of
battle. He wins victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in
battle. Some people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.77 Future Perils (1st)  *Paṭhamaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized.

What five? Firstly, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm
living alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might get bitten
by a snake, a scorpion, or a centipede. And if I died from that it would
be an obstacle to my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
This is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might stumble off a
cliff, or get food poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm,
or piercing winds. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
second future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter wild
beasts---a lion, a tiger, a leopard, a bear, or a hyena---which might
take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
third future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter youths
escaping a crime or on their way to commit one, and they might take my
life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my progress.
I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the fourth future
peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. But in a wilderness there are savage monsters who
might take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to
my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.78 Future Perils (2nd)  *Dutiyaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
What five?

A mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm a youth, young, with pristine black
hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. But there will come a
time when this body is struck with old age. When you're old, overcome by
old age, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and
it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing
happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That
way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though I'm old.' This
is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, I'm rarely ill or unwell.
My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. But there will come a time when this body
is struck with sickness. When you're sick, overcome by sickness, it's
not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy
to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before
that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better
preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving
the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even though I'm sick.' This is the second future
peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, there's plenty of food, a
good harvest, so it's easy to get almsfood, and easy to keep going by
collecting alms. But there will come a time of famine, a bad harvest,
when it's hard to get almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting
alms. In a time of famine, people move to where there's plenty of food,
where they live crowded and cramped together. When you live crowded and
cramped together, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the
Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
thing happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
That way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though there's a
famine.' This is the third future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, people live in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and
water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. But there will come a
time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount
their vehicles and flee everywhere. In a time of peril, people move to
where there's sanctuary, where they live crowded and cramped together.
When you live crowded and cramped together, it's not easy to focus on
the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before that unlikable,
undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better preempt it by
rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even in a time of peril.' This is the fourth
future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, the Saṅgha
lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, with one recitation. But there will come a time of schism in
the Saṅgha. When there is schism in the
Saṅgha, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the
Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
thing happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
That way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though there's
schism in the Saṅgha.' This is the fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.79 Future Perils (3rd)  *Tatiyaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
ordain others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind,
and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. They too will ordain others, but be unable to guide
them in the higher ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop
their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the first future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
give dependence to others, but be unable to guide them in the higher
ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical
endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will give dependence to
others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind, and
wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
second future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. In
discussion about the teachings and elaborations they'll fall into dark
ideas without realizing it. And that is how corrupt training comes from
corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training.
This is the third future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. When
discourses spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent,
dealing with emptiness---are being recited they won't want to listen.
They won't actively listen or try to understand, nor will they think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited they will want to
listen. They'll actively listen and try to understand, and they'll think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the fourth future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. The senior
mendicants will be indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. Those who come
after them will follow their example. They too will become indulgent and
slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy
for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing
the unrealized. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them, and try to give
them up."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.80 Future Perils (4th)  *Catutthaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
robes. They will neglect the practice of wearing rag robes and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get robes in many kinds
of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the first future peril that has
not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
almsfood. They will neglect the practice of walking for almsfood and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get almsfood in many
kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the second future peril
that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
lodgings. They will neglect the practice of staying at the root of a
tree and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital
cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get lodgings in
many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the third future
peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. In such conditions, it can be
expected that they will lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit
one of the corrupt offenses, or reject the training and return to a
lesser life. This is the fourth future peril that has not currently
arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with monastery attendants and novices. In such conditions it can be
expected that they will engage in storing up goods for their own use,
and making obvious hints about digging the earth and cutting plants.
This is the fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to give
them up."

