# The Chapter on Abuse

### AN 5.211 An Abuser  *Akkosakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual
companions, denouncing the noble ones, can expect these five drawbacks.
What five? They're expelled, cut off, blocked out; or they commit a
corrupt offense; or they contract a severe illness. They feel lost when
they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A mendicant who
abuses and insults their spiritual companions, denouncing the noble
ones, can expect these five drawbacks."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.212 Starting Arguments  *Bhaṇḍanakārakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who starts arguments, quarrels, disputes,
debates, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha can expect
five drawbacks. What five? They don't achieve the unachieved. What they
have achieved falls away. They get a bad reputation. They feel lost when
they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A mendicant who
starts arguments, quarrels, disputes, debates, and disciplinary issues
in the Saṅgha can expect these five drawbacks."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.213 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for an unethical person
because of their failure in ethics. What five?

Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person gets a bad reputation. This is the
second drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and
embarrassed, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person feels lost when they die. This is the
fourth drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
This is the fifth drawback. These are the five drawbacks for an
unethical person because of their failure in ethics.

There are these five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics. What five? Firstly, an ethical person gains
great wealth on account of diligence. This is the first benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person gets a good reputation. This is the
second benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and
self-assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person dies not feeling lost. This is the fourth
benefit.

Furthermore, when an ethical person's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth
benefit.

These are the five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.214 Someone Who Talks a Lot  *Bahubhāṇisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a person who talks a
lot. What five? They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five
drawbacks for a person who talks a lot.

There are these five benefits for a person who talks thoughtfully. What
five? They don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five benefits for a person
who talks thoughtfully."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.215 Intolerance (1st)  *Paṭhamaakkhantisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and disagreeable. You have lots of enmity
and many faults. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you dear and agreeable. You have little enmity and few faults. You don't
feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.216 Intolerance (2nd)  *Dutiyaakkhantisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and disagreeable. You're cruel and
remorseful. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up,
after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you likable and agreeable. You're neither cruel nor remorseful. You
don't feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.217 Unimpressive Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamaapāsādikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of unimpressive conduct.
What five? You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people
criticize you. You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And
when your body breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss,
a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of
unimpressive conduct.

There are these five benefits of impressive conduct. What five? You
don't blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You
get a good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. And when the
body breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. These are the five benefits of impressive conduct."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.218 Unimpressive Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyaapāsādikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of unimpressive conduct.
What five? You don't inspire confidence in those without it. You cause
some with confidence to change their minds. You don't follow the
Teacher's instructions. Those who come after you follow your example.
And your mind doesn't become clear. These are the five drawbacks of
unimpressive conduct.

There are these five benefits of impressive conduct. What five? You
inspire confidence in those without it. You increase confidence in those
who have it. You follow the Teacher's instructions. Those who come after
you follow your example. And your mind becomes clear. These are the five
benefits of impressive conduct."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.219 Fire  *Aggisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a fire. What five? It's
bad for your eyes. It's bad for your complexion. It makes you weak. It
draws in groups. And it encourages low talk. These are the five
drawbacks of a fire."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.220 About Madhurā  *Madhurāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of Madhurā.
What five? The ground is uneven and dusty, the dogs are fierce, the
native spirits are vicious, and it's hard to get almsfood. These are the
five drawbacks of Madhurā."

