# The Chapter on Perceptions

### N 5.61 Perceptions (1st)  *Paṭhamasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of ugliness,
death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.62 Perceptions (2nd)  *Dutiyasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of impermanence,
not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.63 Growth (1st)  *Paṭhamavaḍḍhisutta*

"Mendicants, a male noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? He
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A male noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> He who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a good man such as he sees clearly,\
> and takes on what is essential for himself in this life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.64 Growth (2nd)  *Dutiyavaḍḍhisutta*

"Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? She
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A female noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> She who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> takes on what is essential for herself in this life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.65 Discussion  *Sākacchasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.66 Sharing Life  *Sājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions posed when discussing accomplishment in the
knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.67 Bases of Psychic Power (1st)  *Paṭhamaiddhipādasutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five?

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to mental development, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort.

And the fifth is sheer vigor.

Any monk or nun who develops and cultivates these five qualities can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.68 Bases of Psychic Power (2nd)  *Dutiyaiddhipādasutta*

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still not awake but intent
on awakening---I developed and cultivated five things. What five?

The basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
energy, and active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to mental development, and active effort ... the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And
the fifth is sheer vigor.

When I had developed and cultivated these five things, with vigor as
fifth, I extended the mind to realize by insight each and every thing
that can be realized by insight; and I was capable of realizing those
things, since each and every one was within range.

If I wished: 'May I multiply myself and become one again ... controlling
the body as far as the realm of divinity.' I was capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range.

If I wished: ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' I was capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.69 Disillusionment  *Nibbidāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.70 The Ending of Defilements  *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to
the ending of defilements. What five? A mendicant meditates observing
the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives
dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all
conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death.
These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of
defilements."

