# The Chapter on Sick

### N 5.121 Sick  *Gilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then in the late
afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary,
where he saw a certain mendicant who was weak and sick. He sat down on
the seat spread out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if a weak and sick mendicant does not neglect five things,
it can be expected that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

What five? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the
body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction
with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and
has well established the perception of their own death. If a weak and
sick mendicant does not neglect these five things, it can be expected
that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.122 Mindfulness Well Established  *Satisūpaṭṭhitasutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five? It's when a mendicant has well established mindfulness inside
themselves in order to understand the arising and passing away of
phenomena, meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
and observes the impermanence of all conditions. Any monk or nun who
develops and cultivates these five qualities can expect one of two
results: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something left
over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.123 A Carer (1st)  *Paṭhamaupaṭṭhākasutta*

"Mendicants, a patient with five qualities is hard to care for. What
five? They do what is unsuitable. They don't know moderation in what is
suitable. They don't take their medicine. Though their carer wants
what's best for them, they don't accurately report their symptoms by
saying when they're getting worse, getting better, or staying the same.
And they cannot endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities
is hard to care for.

A patient with five qualities is easy to care for. What five? They do
what is suitable. They know moderation in what is suitable. They take
their medicine. Because their carer wants what's best for them, they
accurately report their symptoms by saying when they're getting worse,
getting better, or staying the same. And they can endure physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities is easy to care
for."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.124 A Carer (2nd)  *Dutiyaupaṭṭhākasutta*

"Mendicants, a carer with five qualities is not competent to care for a
patient. What five? They're unable to prepare medicine. They don't know
what is suitable and unsuitable, so they supply what is unsuitable and
remove what is suitable. They care for the sick for the sake of material
benefits, not out of love. They're disgusted to remove feces, urine,
vomit, or spit. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire up, and
inspire the patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with
these five qualities is not competent to care for a patient.

A carer with five qualities is competent to care for a patient. What
five? They're able to prepare medicine. They know what is suitable and
unsuitable, so they remove what is unsuitable and supply what is
suitable. They care for the sick out of love, not for the sake of
material benefits. They're not disgusted to remove feces, urine, vomit,
or spit. They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the
patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with these five
qualities is competent to care for a patient."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.125 Longevity (1st)  *Paṭhamaanāyussāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, activity at unsuitable times, and unchastity.
These are the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
activity at suitable times, and celibacy. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.126 Longevity (2nd)  *Dutiyaanāyussāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, unethical behavior, and bad friends. These are
the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
ethical conduct, and good friends. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.127 Living Apart  *Vapakāsasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is not fit to live apart
from a Saṅgha community. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. And they have a lot of sensual thoughts. A
mendicant with these five qualities is not fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community.

A mendicant with five qualities is fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community. What five? It's when a mendicant is
content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And they think a lot about renunciation. A
mendicant with these five qualities is fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.128 An Ascetic's Happiness  *Samaṇasukhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering for an ascetic.
What five? It's when a mendicant is not content with any kind of robe,
almsfood, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they
lead the spiritual life dissatisfied. These are five kinds of suffering
for an ascetic.

There are these five kinds of happiness for an ascetic. What five? It's
when a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging,
and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they lead the spiritual
life satisfied. These are five kinds of happiness for an ascetic."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.129 Fatal Wounds  *Parikuppasutta*

"Mendicants, these five fatal wounds lead to a place of loss, to hell.
What five? Murdering your mother or father or a perfected one;
maliciously shedding the blood of a Realized One; and causing a schism
in the Saṅgha. These five fatal wounds lead to a place of
loss, to hell."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.130 Loss  *Byasanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five losses. What five? Loss of relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of loss of
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics or view that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five losses.

There are these five endowments. What five? Endowment with relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of endowment with
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It
is because of endowment with ethics or view that sentient beings, when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. These are the five endowments."

