# The Chapter at Tikaṇḍakī

### AN 5.141 Scorn  *Avajānātisutta*

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five? One
gives then scorns, one lives together then scorns, one is gullible for
gossip, one is impulsive, and one is dull and stupid.

And how does a person give then scorn? It's when a person gives someone
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. They
think: 'I give; this one receives.' They give to that person, then they
scorn them. That's how a person gives then scorns.

And how does a person live together then scorn? It's when a person lives
with someone else for two or three years. They live together with that
person, then they scorn them. That's how a person live together then
scorns.

And how is a person gullible for gossip? It's when they're very quick to
believe what a certain person says in praise or criticism of another.
That's how a person is gullible for gossip.

And how is a person impulsive? It's when a certain person is fickle in
faith, devotion, fondness, and confidence. That's how a person is
impulsive.

And how is a person dull and stupid? It's when they don't know the
difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful,
blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side
of dark and bright. That's how a person is dull and stupid.

These are the five people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.142 Transgression  *Ārabhatisutta*

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five?

One person transgresses and regrets it. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad,
unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

One person transgresses and doesn't regret it. And they don't understand
...

One person doesn't transgress yet still feels regret. And they don't
understand ...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. But they don't understand
...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. And they do understand
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

Take the case of the person who transgresses and regrets it. And they
don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.
They should be told: 'Venerable, the defilements born of transgression
are found in you, and the defilements born of regret grow. You would do
well to give up the defilements born of transgression and get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who transgresses and doesn't regret it. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are found in you, but the defilements
born of regret don't grow. You would do well to give up the defilements
born of transgression, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In this way
you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who doesn't transgress yet feels regret. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, yet the
defilements born of regret grow. You would do well to get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who neither transgresses nor regrets. But
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, and the
defilements born of regret don't grow. You would do well to develop the
mind and wisdom. In this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

And so, mendicants, when these four people are advised and instructed by
comparison with the fifth person, they gradually attain the ending of
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.143 At Sārandada  *Sārandadasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were sitting together at
the Sārandada shrine, and this discussion came up among
them, "The appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What five?
The elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the
woman-treasure, and the householder-treasure. The appearance of these
five treasures is rare in the world."

Then those Licchavis sent a man out on to the road, saying, "Mister,
please tell us when you see the Buddha."

That man saw the Buddha coming off in the distance. He went to the
Licchavis and said, "Sirs, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha is coming. Please go at your convenience."

Then those Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, "Please go to the Sārandada shrine, out of
sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then the Buddha went up to the Sārandada shrine, where he
sat on the seat spread out, and said to the Licchavis, "Licchavis, what
were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were
sitting together: 'The appearance of five treasures is rare in the
world. ...'"

"You Licchavis are so fixated on sensual pleasures, that's the only
discussion that came up! Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is
rare in the world. What five?

The appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha.

A teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One.

A person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One.

A person who practices in line with the teaching.

A person who is grateful and thankful.

The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.144 At Tikaṇḍakī  *Tikaṇḍakīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in
Tikaṇḍakī Wood. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

1.  "Mendicants, a mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time
    perceiving the following: the repulsive in the unrepulsive,

2.  the unrepulsive in the repulsive,

3.  the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, and

4.  the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.

5.  A mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time staying
    equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the
    unrepulsive.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for things that arouse
greed.' A mendicant should meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive for this reason.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for things that provoke
hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
both the unrepulsive and the repulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for
things that arouse greed. May hate not arise in me for things that
provoke hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for
things that provoke hate. May greed not arise in me for things that
arouse greed.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May no
greed for things that arouse greed, hate for things that provoke hate,
or delusion for things that promote delusion arise in me in any way at
all.' For this reason a mendicant should meditate staying equanimous,
mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.145 Hell  *Nirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie,
and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Someone with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with five qualities is raised up to heaven What five? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Someone with these five qualities is
raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.146 A Friend  *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has
five qualities. What five? They start up work projects. They take up
disciplinary issues. They conflict with leading mendicants. They like
long and aimless wandering. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire
up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma talk. Mendicants,
you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities.

You should associate with a mendicant friend who has five qualities.
What five? They don't start up work projects. They don't take up
disciplinary issues. They don't conflict with leading mendicants. They
don't like long and aimless wandering. They're able to educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma
talk. You should associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.147 Gifts of an Untrue Person  *Asappurisadānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five gifts of an untrue person. What five?
They give carelessly. They give thoughtlessly. They don't give with
their own hand. They give the dregs. They give without consideration for
consequences. These are the five gifts of an untrue person.

There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give
carefully. They give thoughtfully. They give with their own hand. They
don't give the dregs. They give with consideration for consequences.
These are the five gifts of a true person."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.148 Gifts of a True Person  *Sappurisadānasutta*

"There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give a
gift out of faith. They give a gift carefully. They give a gift at the
right time. They give a gift with no strings attached. They give a gift
without hurting themselves or others.

Having given a gift out of faith, in whatever place the result of that
gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And they're
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

Having given a gift carefully, in whatever place the result of that gift
manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And their children,
wives, bondservants, servants, and workers want to listen. They actively
listen and try to understand.

Having given a gift at the right time, in whatever place the result of
that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And when
the time is right, they get all that they need.

Having given a gift with no strings attached, in whatever place the
result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy.
And their mind tends to enjoy the five refined kinds of sensual
stimulation.

Having given a gift without hurting themselves or others, in whatever
place the result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and
wealthy. And no damage comes to their property from anywhere, whether
fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved heirs.

These are the five gifts of a true person."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.149 Temporarily Free (1st)  *Paṭhamasamayavimuttasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company.
And they don't review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and
company. And they review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily
free."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.150 Temporarily Free (2nd)  *Dutiyasamayavimuttasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, and sleep. They
don't guard the sense doors and they eat too much. These five things
lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, and sleep.
They guard the sense doors and they have moderation in eating. These
five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily
free."



