# The Chapter on Brahmins

### N 5.191 Dogs  *Soṇasutta*

"Mendicants, these five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited
these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. What five?

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women, not with others.
These days brahmins have sex with both brahmin women and others. But
these days dogs have sex only with female dogs, not with other species.
This is the first ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women in the fertile
phase of the menstrual cycle, not at other times. These days brahmins
have sex with brahmin women both in the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle and at other times. But these days dogs have sex only with female
dogs when they are in heat, not at other times. This is the second
ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but
not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins neither bought nor sold brahmin women. They lived
together because they loved each other and wanted their family line to
continue. These days brahmins both buy and sell brahmin women. They live
together whether they love each other or not and they want their family
line to continue. But these days dogs neither buy nor sell female dogs.
They live together because they're attracted to each other and want
their family line to continue. This is the third ancient tradition of
the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins did not store up money, grain, silver, or gold.
These days brahmins do store up money, grain, silver, and gold. But
these days dogs don't store up money, grain, silver, or gold. This is
the fourth ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among
dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins went looking for almsfood for dinner in the
evening, and for breakfast in the morning. These days brahmins eat as
much as they like until their bellies are full, then take away the
leftovers. But these days dogs go looking for dinner in the evening, and
for breakfast in the morning. This is the fifth ancient tradition of the
brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

These five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.192 With the Brahmin Doṇa  *Doṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

Then Doṇa the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Doṇa sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that the ascetic Gotama doesn't bow to old
brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. And this is indeed the case, for Mister Gotama does
not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years
and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their
presence or offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister Gotama."

"Doṇa, do you too claim to be a brahmin?"

"Mister Gotama, if anyone should be rightly called a brahmin, it's me.
For I am well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. I recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. I know them word-by-word, and their grammar. I am well versed
in cosmology and the marks of a great man."

"Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta,
Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja,
Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. They were the authors and
propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal was sung and propagated and
compiled in ancient times. These days, brahmins continue to sing and
chant it. They continue chanting what was chanted, reciting what was
recited, and teaching what was taught. Those seers described five kinds
of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to the Divinity, one who is equal to
a god, one who toes the line, one who crosses the line, and the fifth is
a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of these are you, Doṇa?"

"Mister Gotama, we don't know about these five kinds of brahmins. We
just know the word 'brahmin'. Mister Gotama, please teach me this matter
so I can learn about these five brahmins."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Doṇa replied. The Buddha said this:

"Doṇa, how is a brahmin equal to the Divinity?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the boy's spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a fee
for his tutor, but only by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by farming,
trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of the
professions, but solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms bowl.
Having offered the fee to his tutor, he shaves off his hair and beard,
dresses in ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness.

Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion
... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to
the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. Having developed these four divine meditations, when the body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a realm of
divinity.

That's how a brahmin is equal to the Divinity.

And how is a brahmin equal to a god?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ... Having offered the fee to his tutor, he seeks a wife, but only
by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by buying or
selling, he only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has
sex only with a brahmin woman. He does not have sex with a woman from a
family of aristocrats, peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters,
bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or scavengers. Nor does he have sex with
women who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of
the menstrual cycle.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a pregnant woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a pregnant woman, the boy or girl would be born in
too much filth. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a pregnant
woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a breastfeeding woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a breastfeeding woman, the boy or girl would drink
back the semen. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a
breastfeeding woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex outside the fertile phase of the
menstrual cycle? Because his brahmin wife is not there for sensual
pleasure, fun, and enjoyment, but only for procreation. Having ensured
his progeny through sex, he shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in
ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness.

When he has gone forth, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. Having
developed these four absorptions, when the body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

That's how a brahmin is equal to god.

And how does a brahmin toe the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Not by buying or selling, he only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring
of water. Having ensured his progeny through sex, his child makes him
happy. Because of this attachment he stays in his family property, and
does not go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he doesn't cross
over it. That's why he's called a brahmin who toes the line.

That's how a brahmin toes the line.

And how does a brahmin cross the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he crosses over it.
That's why he's called a brahmin who crosses the line.

That's how a brahmin crosses the line.

And how is a brahmin a brahmin corpse-worker?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the virginal spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a
fee for his tutor by legitimate means and illegitimate means. By
farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of
the professions, not solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms
bowl.

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

He earns a living by any kind of work. The brahmins say to him, 'My good
man, why is it that you claim to be a brahmin, but you earn a living by
any kind of work?'

He says, 'It's like a fire that burns both pure and filthy things, but
doesn't become corrupted by them. In the same way, my good man, if a
brahmin earns a living by any kind of work, he is not corrupted by
that.'

A brahmin is called a brahmin corpse-worker because he earns a living by
any kind of work.

That's how a brahmin is a brahmin corpse-worker.

Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta,
Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja,
Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. They were the authors and
propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal was sung and propagated and
compiled in ancient times. These days, brahmins continue to sing and
chant it. They continue chanting what was chanted, reciting what was
recited, and teaching what was taught.

Those seers described five kinds of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to
the Divinity, one who is equal to a god, one who toes the line, one who
crosses the line, and the fifth is a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of
these are you, Doṇa?"

"This being so, Mister Gotama, I don't even qualify as a brahmin
corpse-worker.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.193 With Saṅgārava  *Saṅgāravasutta*

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Saṅgārava sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why sometimes even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced? And why is it that sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced?"

"Brahmin, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in
sensual desire and you don't truly understand the escape from sensual
desire that has arisen. At that time you don't truly know or see what is
good for yourself, good for another, or good for both. Even hymns that
are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was mixed with dye
such as red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. Even a person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see
it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was heated by
fire, boiling and bubbling. Even a person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the same way, when
your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of
water overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. Even a person with clear
eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In
the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in restlessness and
remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water
stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. Even a person
with clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or
see it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was cloudy,
murky, and muddy, hidden in the darkness. Even a person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the
same way, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt
and you don't truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At
that time you don't truly know or see what is good for yourself, good
for another, or good for both. Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

There's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual
desire and you truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has
arisen. At that time you truly know and see what is good for yourself,
good for another, and good for both. Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.
Suppose there was a bowl of water that was not mixed with dye such as
red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire
... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ...
Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's not heated
by a fire, boiling and bubbling. A person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way, when
your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in restlessness
and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. A person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it.
In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring
to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's transparent, clear,
and unclouded, brought into the light. A person with clear eyes checking
their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way,
there's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt and
you truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At that time
you truly know and see what is good for yourself, good for another, and
good for both. Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why sometimes even hymns
that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are
not practiced. And this is why sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.194 With Kāraṇapālī  *Kāraṇapālīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time the brahmin Kāraṇapālī was working for the
Licchavis. He saw the brahmin Piṅgiyānī coming off in the
distance and said to him, "So, Piṅgiyānī, where are you
coming from in the middle of the day?"

"I'm coming, my good man, from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"What do you think of the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom? Do you
think he's astute?"

"My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom?
You'd really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of
wisdom."

"Mister Piṅgiyānī praises the ascetic Gotama with
magnificent praise indeed."

"Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? He is praised by the praised as
the first among gods and humans."

"But for what reason are you so devoted to the ascetic Gotama?"

"Suppose a person was completely satisfied by the best tasting food.
They wouldn't be attracted to anything that tasted inferior. In the same
way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be,
whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you're not attracted to the doctrines of the various
ascetics and brahmins.

Suppose a person who was weak with hunger was to obtain a honey-cake.
Wherever they taste it, they would enjoy a sweet, delicious flavor. In
the same way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may
be, whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you get a sense of uplift, a confidence of the heart.

Suppose a person were to obtain a piece of sandalwood, whether yellow or
red. Wherever they smelled it---whether at the root, the middle, or the
top---they'd enjoy a delicious fragrance. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you become filled
with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. A good
doctor would cure them on the spot. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you make an end of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean,
with smooth banks, delightful. Then along comes a person struggling in
the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the
lotus pond to bathe and drink. And all their stress, weariness, and heat
exhaustion would die down. In the same way, when you hear Mister
Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then all your stress,
weariness, and exhaustion die down."

When this was said, the brahmin Kāraṇapālī got up from his
seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Excellent, Mister Piṅgiyānī! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, Mister Piṅgiyānī has made the
teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth,
may Mister Piṅgiyānī remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.195 Piṅgiyānī  *Piṅgiyānīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were visiting the Buddha.
Some of the Licchavis were in blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned
with blue. And some were similarly colored in yellow, red, or white. But
the Buddha outshone them all in beauty and glory.

Then the brahmin Piṅgīyānī got up from his seat, arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said, "I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to
speak, Holy One!"

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said the Buddha. So the brahmin
Piṅgīyānī extolled the Buddha in his presence with a
fitting verse.

> "Like a fragrant pink lotus\
> that blooms in the morning, its fragrance unfaded---\
> see Aṅgīrasa shine,\
> bright as the sun in the sky!"

Then those Licchavis clothed Piṅgiyānī with five hundred
upper robes. And Piṅgiyānī clothed the Buddha with them.

Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis:

"Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What
five? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One. A person who practices in line with the teaching. A person
who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these five treasures is
rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.196 The Great Dreams  *Mahāsupinasutta*

"Mendicants, before his awakening five great dreams appeared to the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was
still not awake but intent on awakening. What five?

This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains, was his
pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His right hand
was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid down in
the southern sea. This is the first great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel and
stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This is the second great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet and
covered his knees. This is the third great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, four birds of different colors came from the four quarters. They
fell at his feet, turning pure white. This is the fourth great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth while
remaining unsoiled. This is the fifth great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Now, as to when, before his awakening, the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha was still not awake but intent on
awakening. This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains,
was his pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His
right hand was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid
down in the southern sea. This was fulfilled when the Buddha awakened to
the perfect awakening. This was the first great dream that appeared to
him while he was still not awakened.

As to when a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel
and stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This was fulfilled when, after
the Buddha had awakened to the noble eightfold path, it was well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans. This was the second great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet
and covered his knees. This was fulfilled when many white-clothed
laypeople went for refuge to him for life. This was the third great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when four birds of different colors came from the four quarters.
They fell at his feet, turning pure white. This was fulfilled when
members of the four classes---aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials---went forth from the lay life to homelessness in the teaching
and training proclaimed by the Realized One and realized supreme
freedom. This was the fourth great dream that appeared to him while he
was still not awakened.

As to when he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth
while remaining unsoiled. This was fulfilled when the Realized One
received robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. And he used them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This was the fifth great dream
that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

Before his awakening these five great dreams appeared to the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was still not
awake but intent on awakening."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.197 Obstacles to Rain  *Vassasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles to rain, which the
forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not traverse. What
five?

In the upper atmosphere the fire element flares up, which disperses the
clouds. This is the first obstacle to rain, which the forecasters don't
know, and which their vision does not traverse.

Furthermore, in the upper atmosphere the air element flares up, which
disperses the clouds. This is the second obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, Rāhu, lord of titans, receives water in his
hand and tosses it in the ocean. This is the third obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, the gods of the rain clouds become negligent. This is the
fourth obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, humans become unprincipled. This is the fifth obstacle to
rain, which the forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not
traverse.

These are the five obstacles to rain, which the forecasters don't know,
and which their vision does not traverse."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.198 Well-Spoken Words  *Vācāsutta*

"Mendicants, speech that has five factors is well spoken, not poorly
spoken. It's blameless and is not criticized by sensible people. What
five? It is speech that is timely, true, gentle, beneficial, and loving.
Speech with these five factors is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It's
blameless and is not criticized by sensible people."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.199 Families  *Kulasutta*

"When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for five reasons. What five?

When they see ethical renunciates coming to their family, the people
bring up confidence in their hearts. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to heaven.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people rise from
their seats, bow down, and offer them a seat. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to a birth in an eminent family.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people get rid of the
stain of stinginess. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to being illustrious.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people share what
they have as best they can. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to great wealth.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people ask questions
and listen to the teachings. At that time the family is practicing a
path leading to great wisdom.

When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for these five reasons."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.200 Elements of Escape  *Nissāraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five elements of escape. What five?

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but on that
their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on renunciation, on that their mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. Their mind
is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well
detached from sensual pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and
feverish defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they
don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the escape from
sensual pleasures is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.

Delight in sensual pleasures, ill will, harming, form, and substantial
reality don't linger within them. That's why they're called a mendicant
who is without underlying tendencies, who has cut off craving, untied
the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering. These are the five elements of escape."



