# The Chapter on a Resident Mendicant

### N 5.231 A Resident Mendicant  *Āvāsikasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is not admirable.
What five? They're not accomplished in being well-presented and doing
their duties. They're not very learned and don't remember what they've
learned. They're not self-effacing and don't enjoy self-effacement.
They're not a good speaker and do not enunciate well. They're witless,
dull, and idiotic. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is not
admirable.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is admirable. What five?
They're accomplished in being well-presented and doing their duties.
They're very learned and remember what they've learned. They're
self-effacing and enjoy self-effacement. They're a good speaker who
enunciates well. They're wise, bright, and clever. A resident mendicant
with these five qualities is admirable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.232 Liked  *Piyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is dear and
beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.233 Beautification  *Sobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities beautifies the
monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire those who
approach them with a Dhamma talk.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities beautifies the
monastery."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.234 Very Helpful  *Bahūpakārasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is very helpful to
the monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They repair what is decayed and damaged.

When a large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants
from abroad, they go to the lay people and announce:

'A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from
abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to make merit!'

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is very helpful to the
monastery."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.235 A Sympathetic Mendicant  *Anukampasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities shows sympathy to
the lay people. What five? They encourage them in higher ethics. They
equip them to see the truth of the teachings. When they are sick, they
go to them and prompt their mindfulness, saying: 'Establish your
mindfulness, good sirs, in what is worthy.' When a large mendicant
Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad, they go to
the lay people and announce: 'A large mendicant Saṅgha is
arriving with mendicants from abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to
make merit!' And they eat whatever food they give them, coarse or fine,
not wasting a gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities shows sympathy to the lay people."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.236 Deserving Criticism (1st)  *Paṭhamaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
Without examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are
dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things that are inspiring. And
they waste a gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't
arouse faith in things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in
things that are inspiring. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.237 Deserving Criticism (2nd)  *Dutiyaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're not stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they don't waste a gift given in
faith. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.238 Deserving Criticism (3rd)  *Tatiyaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A resident
mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.239 Stinginess (1st)  *Paṭhamamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, and praise. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, and praise. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.240 Stinginess (2nd)  *Dutiyamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

