# The Chapter on Living Comfortably

### N 5.101 Assurance  *Sārajjasutta*

"Mendicants, these five qualities make a trainee assured. What five?
It's when a mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and
wise.

A person of faith doesn't have the insecurities of someone who lacks
faith. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An ethical person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is
unethical. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

A learned person doesn't have the insecurities of a person of little
learning. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An energetic person doesn't have the insecurities of a lazy person. So
this quality makes a trainee assured.

A wise person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is witless.
So this quality makes a trainee assured.

These are the five qualities that make a trainee assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.102 Suspected  *Ussaṅkitasutta*

"Mendicants, even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be
suspected and distrusted as a 'bad monk' for five reasons.

What five? It's when a monk resorts to prostitutes, widows, voluptuous
girls, eunuchs, or nuns for alms.

Even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be suspected and
distrusted as a 'bad monk' for these five reasons."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.103 A Master Thief  *Mahācorasutta*

"Mendicants, a master thief with five factors breaks into houses,
plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway
robbery. What five? A master thief relies on rough ground, on thick
cover, and on powerful individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a master thief rely on rough ground? It's when a master
thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged mountains. That's how
a master thief relies on rough ground.

And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? It's when a master
thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a blind spot, or a large
forest grove. That's how a master thief relies on thick cover.

And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
master thief relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a master thief pay bribes? It's when a master thief is
rich, affluent, and wealthy. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of
anything, I'll settle it with a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief pays bribes.

And how does a master thief act alone? It's when a master thief carries
out robbery all alone. Why is that? So that their secret plans are not
leaked to others. That's how a master thief acts alone.

A master thief with these five factors breaks into houses, plunders
wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery.

In the same way, when a bad mendicant has five qualities, they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What five? A bad
mendicant relies on rough ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on rough ground? It's when a bad
mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's
how a bad mendicant relies on rough ground.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? It's when a bad
mendicant has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist view. That's how
a bad mendicant relies on thick cover.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
bad mendicant relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a bad mendicant pay bribes? It's when a bad mendicant
receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of anything, I'll settle it with
a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens. That's how a bad mendicant
pays bribes.

And how does a bad mendicant act alone? It's when a bad mendicant dwells
alone in the borderlands. They visit families there to acquire material
things. That's how a bad mendicant acts alone.

When a bad mendicant has these five qualities, they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.104 An Exquisite Ascetic of Ascetics  *Samaṇasukhumālasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

What five?

It's when a mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to
accept---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---rarely using them without invitation.

When living with other spiritual practitioners, they usually find
themselves treated agreeably by them by way of body, speech, and mind,
and rarely disagreeably. And they are usually presented with agreeable
things by them, rarely with disagreeable ones.

They're healthy, so the various unpleasant feelings---stemming from
disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their conjunction; or caused by
change in weather, by not taking care of themselves, by overexertion, or
as the result of past deeds---usually don't come up.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me. For I usually use only what I've been invited to accept. When
living with other mendicants, I am usually treated agreeably by them.
And I usually present them with agreeable things. I'm healthy. I get the
four absorptions when I want, without trouble or difficulty. And I've
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. So if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics, it's me."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.105 Living Comfortably  *Phāsuvihārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?

It's when a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in
private.

They live according to the precepts shared with their spiritual
companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering.

These are the five ways of living comfortably."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.106 With Ānanda  *Ānandasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, how could a mendicant live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own ethical conduct, but
they don't urge others to be ethical. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. That's how a mendicant could
live comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That's how
a mendicant could live comfortably while staying in a monastic
community."

"But sir, might there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. And they
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community.

And I say that there is no better or finer way of living comfortably
than this."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.107 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.108 An adept  *Asekhasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when they have the entire spectrum of the adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom.
A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.109 All Four Quarters  *Cātuddisasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is at ease in any quarter.
What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is at ease in any quarter."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.110 Wilderness  *Araññasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they're ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They live with energy roused up. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

When a mendicant has these five qualities they're ready to frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

