# The Chapter on Resentment

### N 5.161 Getting Rid of Resentment (1st)  *Paṭhamaāghātapaṭivinayasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

You should develop love for a person you resent. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

You should develop compassion for a person you resent. ...

You should develop equanimity for a person you resent. ...

You should disregard a person you resent, paying no attention to them.
...

You should focus on the ownership of deeds regarding that person: 'This
venerable is the owner of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are
their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be the heir of
whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.' That's how to get rid of
resentment for that person.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.162 Getting Rid of Resentment (2nd)  *Dutiyaāghātapaṭivinayasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body is impure, but
whose behavior by way of speech is pure, you should get rid of
resentment for that kind of person.

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of speech is impure, but
whose behavior by way of body is pure, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, and who doesn't get an openness and clarity of heart from time
to time, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
you should get rid of resentment for that kind of person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body is impure, but whose behavior by way of speech is pure? Suppose
a mendicant wearing rag robes sees a rag by the side of the road. They'd
hold it down with the left foot, spread it out with the right foot, tear
out what was intact, and take it away with them. In the same way, at
that time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of body
and focus on their pure behavior by way of speech. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of speech is impure, but whose behavior by way of body is pure? Suppose
there was a lotus pond covered with moss and aquatic plants. Then along
comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and
parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond, sweep apart the moss and
aquatic plants, drink from their cupped hands, and be on their way. In
the same way, at that time you should ignore that person's impure
behavior by way of speech and focus on their pure behavior by way of
body. That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a little water in a cow's
hoofprint. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They might think: 'This little bit of water
is in a cow's hoofprint. If I drink it with my cupped hands or a bowl,
I'll stir it and disturb it, making it undrinkable. Why don't I get down
on all fours and drink it up like a cow, then be on my way?' So that's
what they do. In the same way, at that time you should ignore that
person's impure behavior by way of speech and body, and focus on the
fact that they get an openness and clarity of heart from time to time.
That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, and who doesn't get an openness and
clarity of heart from time to time? Suppose a person was traveling along
a road, and they were sick, suffering, gravely ill. And it was a long
way to a village, whether ahead or behind. And they didn't have any
suitable food or medicine, or a competent carer, or someone to bring
them within a village. Another person traveling along the road might see
them, and think of them with nothing but sympathy, kindness, and
sympathy: 'Oh, may this person get suitable food or medicine, or a
competent carer, or someone to bring them within a village. Why is that?
So that they don't come to ruin right here.' In the same way, at that
time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of speech
and body, and the fact that they don't get an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time, and think of them with nothing but compassion,
kindness, and sympathy: 'Oh, may this person give up bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind. Why is that? So that, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're not reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.' That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear,
sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful, and shaded by
many trees. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond to bathe
and drink. And after emerging they'd sit or lie down right there in the
shade of the trees.

In the same way, at that time you should focus on that person's pure
behavior by way of body and speech, and on the fact that they get an
openness and clarity of heart from time to time. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person. Relying on a person who is impressive all
around, the mind becomes confident.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.163 Discussions  *Sākacchasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.164 Sharing a Way of Life  *Sājīvasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.165 Asking Questions  *Pañhapucchāsutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: ...
"Whoever asks a question of another, does so for one or other of these
five reasons. What five? Someone asks a question of another from
stupidity and folly. Or they ask from corrupt wishes, being of wishful
temperament. Or they ask in order to disparage. Or they ask wanting to
understand. Or they ask with the thought, 'If they correctly answer the
question I ask it's good. If not, I'll correctly answer it for them.'
Whoever asks a question of another, does so for one or other of these
five reasons. As for myself, I ask with the thought, 'If they correctly
answer the question I ask it's good. If not, I'll correctly answer it
for them.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.166 Cessation  *Nirodhasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, then, surpassing the company of gods
that consume solid food, they're reborn in a certain host of mind-made
gods. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "This is
not possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated
his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Venerable
Udāyī disagrees with me three times, and not one mendicant
agrees with me. Why don't I go to see the Buddha?"

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. There is such a possibility. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated
his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Even in front of the
Buddha Venerable Udāyī disagrees with me three times, and
not one mendicant agrees with me. I'd better stay silent." Then
Sāriputta fell silent.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Udāyī, "But
Udāyī, do you believe in a mind-made body?"

"For those gods, sir, who are formless, made of perception."

"Udāyī, what has an incompetent fool like you got to say?
How on earth could you imagine you've got something worth saying!"

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda! How can you just
watch while a senior mendicant is being harassed? Don't you have any
compassion for a senior mendicant who is being harassed?"

Then the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then, not long after the Buddha had left, Venerable Ānanda went to
Venerable Upavāna and said to him, "Reverend
Upavāna, they've been harassing other senior mendicants,
but I didn't question them. I wouldn't be surprised if the Buddha brings
this up when he comes out of retreat later this afternoon. He might even
call upon Venerable Upavāna himself. And right now I feel
timid."

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out, and said to
Upavāna, "Upavāna, how many qualities should a
senior mendicant have to be dear and beloved to their spiritual
companions, respected and admired?"

"Sir, a senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

"Good, good, Upavāna! A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected
and admired. If these five qualities are not found in a senior
mendicant, why would their spiritual companions honor, respect, revere,
or venerate them? Because of their broken teeth, gray hair, and wrinkled
skin? But since these five qualities are found in a senior mendicant,
their spiritual companions honor, respect, revere, or venerate them."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.167 Accusation  *Codanāsutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, a
mendicant who wants to accuse another should first establish five things
in themselves.

What five? I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong time. I will
speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not harshly. I will
speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak lovingly, not from
secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first
establish these five things in themselves.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the wrong
time, not being disturbed at the right time. They're accused falsely,
not disturbed truthfully. They're accused harshly, not disturbed gently.
They're accused harmfully, not disturbed beneficially. They're accused
with secret hate, not disturbed lovingly.

The mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in five
ways. 'Venerable, you were accused at the wrong time, not at the right
time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You were accused falsely,
not truthfully. ... You were accused harshly, not gently. ... You were
accused harmfully, not beneficially. ... You were accused with secret
hate, not lovingly. There's no need for you to feel remorse.' A
mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes improper accusations should be chastened in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the wrong time, not at the
right time. There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation falsely, not truthfully. ... You made an accusation harshly,
not gently. ... You made an accusation harmfully, not beneficially. ...
You made an accusation with secret hate, not lovingly. There's a reason
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes improper accusations
should be chastened in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant wouldn't think to make a false accusation.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the right
time, not being disturbed at the wrong time. They're accused truthfully,
not disturbed falsely. They're accused gently, not disturbed harshly.
They're accused beneficially, not disturbed harmfully. They're accused
lovingly, not disturbed with secret hate.

The mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in five ways.
'Venerable, you were accused at the right time, not at the wrong time.
There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You were accused truthfully,
not falsely. ... You were accused gently, not harshly. ... You were
accused beneficially, not harmfully. ... You were accused lovingly, not
with secret hate. There's a reason for you to feel remorse.' The
mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes proper accusations should be reassured in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the right time, not at the
wrong time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation truthfully, not falsely. ... You made an accusation gently,
not harshly. ... You made an accusation beneficially, not harmfully. ...
You made an accusation lovingly, not with secret hate. There's no need
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes proper accusations
should be reassured in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant would think to make a true accusation.

A person who is accused should ground themselves in two things: truth
and an even temper. Even if others accuse me---at the right time or the
wrong time, truthfully or falsely, gently or harshly, beneficially or
harmfully, lovingly or with secret hate---I will still ground myself in
two things: truth and an even temper. If I know that that quality is
found in me, I will tell them that it is. If I know that that quality is
not found in me, I will tell them that it is not."

"Even when you speak like this, Sāriputta, there are still
some silly people here who do not respectfully take it up."

"Sir, there are those faithless people who went forth from the lay life
to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood. They're
devious, deceitful, and sneaky. They're restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, and loose-tongued. They do not guard their sense doors or
eat in moderation, and they are not dedicated to wakefulness. They don't
care about the ascetic life, and don't keenly respect the training.
They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting
seclusion, lazy, and lacking energy. They're unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds, witless and
idiotic. When I speak to them like this, they don't respectfully take it
up.

Sir, there are those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness out of faith. They're not devious, deceitful, and sneaky.
They're not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued.
They guard their sense doors and eat in moderation, and they are
dedicated to wakefulness. They care about the ascetic life, and keenly
respect the training. They're not indulgent or slack, nor are they
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They're energetic and
determined. They're mindful, with situational awareness, immersion, and
unified minds; wise and clever. When I speak to them like this, they do
respectfully take it up."

"Sāriputta, those faithless people who went forth from the
lay life to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood ...
Leave them be.

But those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to homelessness out
of faith ... You should speak to them. Sāriputta, you
should advise your spiritual companions! You should instruct your
spiritual companions! Thinking: 'I will draw my spiritual companions
away from false teachings and ground them in true teachings.' That's how
you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.168 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. In the
same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a
vital condition for right immersion.

When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has
fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is
true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and
vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and
dispassion. When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.169 Quick-witted  *Khippanisantisutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Reverend Sāriputta, how are we to define a mendicant who
is quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings, who learns well,
learns much, and does not forget what they've learned?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and apply your mind
well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied. Venerable Ānanda said
this:

"It's when a mendicant is skilled in the meaning, skilled in the
teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in
sequence. That is how to define a mendicant who is quick-witted when it
comes to skillful teachings, who learns well, learns much, and does not
forget what they've learned."

"It's incredible, it's amazing! How well this was said by Venerable
Ānanda! And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who has these
five qualities: 'Reverend Ānanda is skilled in the meaning, skilled in
the teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled
in sequence.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.170 With Bhaddaji  *Bhaddajisutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then Venerable Bhaddaji went up to Venerable
Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and Venerable Ānanda
said to him:

"Reverend Bhaddaji, what is the best sight, the best sound, the best
happiness, the best perception, and the best state of existence?"

"Reverend, there is this Divinity, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the
universal seer, the wielder of power. When you see the Divinity, that's
the best sight. There are the gods called 'of streaming radiance', who
are drenched and steeped in pleasure. Every so often they feel inspired
to exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what bliss!' When you hear that, it's
the best sound. There are the gods called 'of universal beauty'. Since
they're truly content, they experience pleasure. This is the best
happiness. There are the gods reborn in the dimension of nothingness.
This is the best perception. There are the gods reborn in the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the best state of
existence."

"So, Venerable Bhaddaji, do you agree with what most people say about
this?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Bhaddaji, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, reverend," Bhaddaji replied. Ānanda said this:

"What you see when the defilements end in the present life is the best
sight. What you hear when the defilements end in the present life is the
best sound. The happiness you feel when the defilements end in the
present life is the best happiness. What you perceive when the
defilements end in the present life is the best perception. The state of
existence in which the defilements end in the present life is the best
state of existence."

