# The Chapter on Senior Mendicants

### AN 5.81 Desirable  *Rajanīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They desire the desirable, they hate the hateful, they're
deluded by the delusory, they're annoyed by the annoying, and they're
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is unlikable and disagreeable by their spiritual companions,
not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't
desire the desirable, they don't hate the hateful, they're not deluded
by the delusory, they're not annoyed by the annoying, and they're not
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected
and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.82 Free of Greed  *Vītarāgasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They're not free of greed, hate, and delusion; they are
offensive and contemptuous. A senior mendicant with these five qualities
is unlikable and disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not
respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're free of
greed, hate, and delusion; they're not offensive and contemptuous. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.83 Deceiver  *Kuhakasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They use deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and they
use material things to chase after other material things. A senior
mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and disagreeable to
their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't use
deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't use material
things to chase after other material things. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.84 Faithless  *Assaddhasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and disagreeable
to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're
faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. A senior
mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.85 Cannot Endure  *Akkhamasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches. A senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.86 Attaining the Methods of Textual Analysis  *Paṭisambhidāpattasutta*

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They have
attained the textual analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and
eloquence. And they are deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. A senior mendicant
with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual
companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.87 Ethical  *Sīlavantasutta*

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.88 Senior Mendicants  *Therasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following that includes both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

But they have wrong view and distorted perspective. They draw many
people away from the true teaching and establish them in false
teachings.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

A senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following, including both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

And they have right view and an undistorted perspective. They draw many
people away from false teachings and establish them in the true
teaching.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.89 A Trainee (1st)  *Paṭhamasekhasutta*

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they don't review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things don't lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.90 A Trainee (2nd)  *Dutiyasekhasutta*

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee has many duties and responsibilities, and
is competent in many tasks. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the first thing that leads to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee spends too much time doing trivial
work. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that leads to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee mixes closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the third thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee enters the town at the wrong time, and
returns too late in the day. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that leads to
the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't get to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the fifth thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee doesn't have many duties and
responsibilities, even though they are competent in many tasks. They
don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart.
This is the first thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't waste their day doing trivial
work. They don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the third thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't enter the village too early or
return too late in the day. They don't neglect retreat, and are
committed to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that
doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee gets to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the fifth thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

