# The Chapter with Kakudha

### AN 5.91 Accomplishments (1st)  *Paṭhamasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. These are the five
accomplishments."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.92 Accomplishment (2nd)  *Dutiyasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. These are the five accomplishments."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.93 Declarations  *Byākaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five ways of declaring enlightenment. What five?
One declares enlightenment out of stupidity and folly. Or because of
corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of madness and
mental disorder. Or out of overestimation. Or one declares enlightenment
rightly. These are the five ways of declaring enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.94 Living Comfortably  *Phāsuvihārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?
It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. These are the five ways of living comfortably."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.95 Unshakable  *Akuppasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five things will soon penetrate the
unshakable. What five? It's when a mendicant has attained the textual
analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and eloquence, and they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.96 Remembering What You've Learned  *Sutadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.97 Talk  *Kathāsutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They get to take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the
heart, when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That is, talk
about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, keeping your distance,
arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge
and vision of freedom.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.98 In the Wilderness  *Āraññakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant practicing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five? It's when a
mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is unburdensome and
contented with life's necessities. They eat little, not devoted to
filling their stomach. They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to
wakefulness. They live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. They
review the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant practicing
mindfulness of breathing who has these five things will soon penetrate
the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.99 The Lion  *Sīhasutta*

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. If he strikes an
elephant, he does it carefully, not carelessly. If he strikes a buffalo
... a cow ... a leopard ... or any smaller creatures---even a hare or a
cat---he does it carefully, not carelessly. Why is that? Thinking: 'May
I not lose my way.'

'Lion' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly,
this is his lion's roar. When the Realized One teaches the monks ...
nuns ... laymen ... laywomen ... or ordinary people---even food-carriers
and hunters---he teaches them carefully, not carelessly. Why is that?
Because the Realized One has respect and reverence for the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.100 With Kakudha  *Kakudhatherasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

At that time the Koliyan named Kakudha---Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna's supporter---had recently passed away and
been reborn in a certain host of mind-made gods. He was reincarnated in
a life-form that was two or three times the size of a Magadhan village
with its fields. But with that life-form he didn't obstruct himself or
others.

Then the god Kakudha went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna,
bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, this fixed desire arose
in Devadatta: 'I shall lead the mendicant Saṅgha.' And as
that thought arose, Devadatta lost that psychic power."

That's what the god Kakudha said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled
Mahāmoggallāna, keeping him on his right side, before
vanishing right there.

Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and told him what had happened.

"But Moggallāna, did you comprehend the god Kakudha's mind,
and know that everything he says is correct and not otherwise?"

"Indeed I did, sir."

"Mark these words, Moggallāna! Mark these words! Now that
futile man Devadatta will expose himself by his own deeds.

Moggallāna, there are these five teachers found in the
world. What five?

Firstly, some teacher with impure conduct claims: 'I am pure in ethics.
My ethical conduct is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure ethical conduct, but claims to be
ethically pure. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's conduct, and the teacher expects
them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure livelihood claims: 'I am pure in
livelihood. My livelihood is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their
disciples know: 'This teacher has impure livelihood, but claims to have
pure livelihood. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's livelihood, and the teacher
expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure teaching claims: 'I am pure in
teaching. My teaching is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure teaching, but claims to have pure
teaching. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And
how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent
to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A
person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a
teacher cover up their teacher's teaching, and the teacher expects them
to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure answers claims: 'I am pure in how
I answer. My answers are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure answers, but claims to have pure answers.
They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's answers, and the teacher expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure knowledge and vision claims: 'I am
pure in knowledge and vision. My knowledge and vision are pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' But their disciples know: 'This teacher has impure
knowledge and vision, but claims to have pure knowledge and vision. They
wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's knowledge and vision, and the teacher expects
them to do so. These are the five teachers found in the world.

But Moggallāna, I have pure ethical conduct, and I claim:
'I am pure in ethical conduct. My ethical conduct is pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my conduct, and I don't expect
them to. I have pure livelihood, and I claim: 'I am pure in livelihood.
My livelihood is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up
my livelihood, and I don't expect them to. I have pure teaching, and I
claim: 'I am pure in teaching. My teaching is pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my teaching, and I don't
expect them to. I have pure answers, and I claim: 'I am pure in how I
answer. My answers are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't
cover up my answers, and I don't expect them to. I have pure knowledge
and vision, and I claim: 'I am pure in knowledge and vision. My
knowledge and vision are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't
cover up my knowledge and vision, and I don't expect them to."


