# The Chapter on Ordination

### N 5.251 Who Should Give Ordination  *Upasampādetabbasutta*

"Mendicants, ordination should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Ordination should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.252 Who Should Give Dependence  *Nissayasutta*

"Mendicants, dependence should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Dependence should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

### N 5.253 Who Should Have a Novice as Attendant  *Sāmaṇerasutta*

"Mendicants, a novice should attend on a mendicant with five qualities.
What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. A novice should attend on a mendicant with these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.254 Five Kinds of Stinginess  *Pañcamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of stinginess. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. These are the five kinds of stinginess. The most contemptible
of these five kinds of stinginess is stinginess with the teachings."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.255 Giving Up Stinginess  *Macchariyappahānasutta*

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
five kinds of stinginess. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. The spiritual life
is lived to give up and cut out these five kinds of stinginess."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.256 The First Absorption  *Paṭhamajhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. Without giving up
these five qualities you can't enter and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. After giving up these five
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.257--263 The Second Absorption, Etc.  *Dutiyajhānasuttādisattaka*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. Without giving up these five qualities you can't realize
perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the teachings. After
giving up these five qualities you can realize perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.264 Another Discourse on the First Absorption  *Aparapaṭhamajhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and thankfulness. After
giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the first
absorption."

### N 5.265--271 Another Discourse on the Second Absorption, Etc.  *Aparadutiyajhānasuttādi*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack
of gratitude and thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities
you can't realize perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. After giving up these five qualities you can realize
perfection."

<!--pg-->
## Abbreviated Texts on Appointments

### N 5.272 A Meal Designator  *Bhattuddesakasutta*

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
meal designator. What five? They make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they don't know if
a meal has been assigned or not. A person with these five qualities
should not be appointed as meal designator.

A person with five qualities should be appointed as meal designator.
What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a meal has been
assigned or not. A person with these five qualities should be appointed
as meal designator.

A person with five qualities who has been appointed as meal designator
should not be called upon ... should be called upon ... should be known
as a fool ... should be known as astute ... they keep themselves broken
and damaged ... they keep themselves unbroken and undamaged ... is cast
down to hell ... is raised up to heaven. What five? They don't make
decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice.
And they know if a meal has been assigned or not. A meal designator with
these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.273--285 A Lodgings Assigner  *Senāsanapaññāpakasuttādi*

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
lodgings assigner ... they don't know if a lodging has been assigned or
not ... A person with five qualities should be appointed as lodgings
assigner ... they know if a lodging has been assigned or not ...

A person should not be appointed as lodgings allocator ... they don't
know if a lodging has been allocated or not ... A person should be
appointed as lodgings allocator ... they know if a lodging has been
allocated or not ...

A person should not be appointed as storeperson ... they don't know if
stores are protected or not ... A person should be appointed as
storeperson ... they know if stores are protected or not ...

... robe receiver ...

... robe distributor ...

... porridge distributor ...

... fruit distributor ...

... cake distributor ...

... dispenser of minor accessories ...

... allocator of bathing cloths ...

... bowl allocator ...

... supervisor of monastery staff ...

... supervisor of novices ...

What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a novice has been
supervised or not. A supervisor of novices with these five qualities is
raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
## Abbreviated Texts on Training Rules

### N 5.286 A Monk  *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, a monk with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
He kills living creatures, steals, has sex, lies, and consumes beer,
wine, and liquor intoxicants. A monk with these five qualities is cast
down to hell.

A monk with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? He doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, have sex, lie, or consume beer, wine, and
liquor intoxicants. A monk with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.287--292 A Nun  *Bhikkhunīsuttādi*

"A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five? They
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. With these five qualities they're
cast down to hell.

A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. With these five qualities
they're raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.293 An Ājīvaka  *Ājīvakasutta*

"Mendicants, an Ājīvaka ascetic with five qualities is cast
down to hell. What five? They kill living creatures, steal, have sex,
lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. An
Ājīvaka ascetic with these five qualities is cast down to
hell."


### N 5.294--302 A Jain Ascetic, Etc.  *Nigaṇṭhasuttādi*

"A Jain ascetic ... disciple of the shavelings ... a matted-hair ascetic
... a wanderer ... a follower of Māgaṇḍiya ... a
trident-bearing ascetic ... a follower of the unobstructed ... a
follower of Gotama ... a performer of rituals for the gods ... with five
qualities is cast down to hell. What five? They kill living creatures,
steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. With these five qualities they're cast down to hell."

<!--pg-->
## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### N 5.303 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.304 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.305 Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence,
the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up,
and the perception of fading away. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.306 Untitled Discourse on Greed (4th)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For
insight into greed, these five things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.307 Untitled Discourse on Greed (5th)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For insight
into greed, these five things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.308--1152 Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc.  *\~*

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, five things should be developed."

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... five things should be developed.

What five? The powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. For the letting go of negligence, these five things should be
developed."

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE FIVES IS FINISHED.
:::

# The Book of the Sixes


