# The Chapter on Powers

### AN 5.11 Not Learned From Anyone Else  *Ananussutasutta*

"I claim to have attained perfection and consummation of insight
regarding principles not learned before from another. The Realized One
has five powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull's
place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine
wheel. What five? The powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. These are the five powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.12 Peak  *Kūṭasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee. Of these five powers of a trainee, the power
of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything together.

It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is the chief point, which holds and
binds everything together. In the same way, of these five powers of a
trainee, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything
together.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.13 In Brief  *Saṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.14 In Detail  *Vitthatasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the power of
mindfulness.

And what is the power of immersion? It's when a noble disciple, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. This is called the power of immersion.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom.

These are the five powers."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.15 Should Be Seen  *Daṭṭhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the power of faith be seen? In the four factors of
stream-entry.

And where should the power of energy be seen? In the four right efforts.

And where should the power of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And where should the power of immersion be seen? In the four
absorptions.

And where should the power of wisdom be seen? In the four noble truths.

These are the five powers."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.16 The Peak, Again  *Punakūṭasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers. Of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together. It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is
the chief point, which holds and binds everything together. In the same
way, of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.17 One's Own Welfare  *Paṭhamahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for their own
welfare, but not that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant is
personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the
knowledge and vision of freedom. But they don't encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for
their own welfare, but not that of others."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.18 Welfare of Others (2nd)  *Dutiyahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. But they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.19 The Welfare of Neither  *Tatiyahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing neither for
their own welfare, nor that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. Nor do they encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing
neither for their own welfare, nor that of others."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.20 The Welfare of Both  *Catutthahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for both
their own welfare and that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and
the knowledge and vision of freedom. And they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing both for
their own welfare and that of others."

