# The Chapter on Bad Conduct

### N 5.241 Bad Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And when your body
breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. When your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These
are the five benefits of good conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.242 Bad Bodily Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamakāyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

### N 5.243 Bad Verbal Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamavacīduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

### N 5.244 Bad Mental Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamamanoduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.245 Bad Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You drift away from true teachings. You settle
on untrue teachings. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You drift away from untrue teachings. You settle on
true teachings. These are the five benefits of good conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.246 Bad Bodily Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyakāyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

### N 5.247 Bad Verbal Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyavacīduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

### N 5.248 Bad Mental Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyamanoduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.249 A Charnel Ground  *Sivathikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks to a charnel ground. What
five?

It's filthy, stinking, frightening, a gathering place for savage
monsters, and a weeping place for many people. These are the five
drawbacks of a charnel ground.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a person like a charnel
ground. What five? To start with, a person has filthy conduct by way of
body, speech, and mind. This is how they're filthy, I say. That person
is just as filthy as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they get a bad reputation. This is how
they're stinky, I say. That person is just as stinky as a charnel
ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, good-hearted spiritual companions avoid
them from afar. That's how they're frightening, I say. That person is
just as frightening as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they live together with people of a
similar character. This is how they gather with savage monsters, I say.
That person is just as much a gathering place of savage monsters as a
charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, when good-hearted spiritual companions
see them they complain: 'Oh, it's so painful for us to have to live
together with such as these.' This is how there's weeping, I say. This
person is just as much a weeping place for many people as a charnel
ground.

These are the five drawbacks of a person like a charnel ground."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.250 Faith in Individuals  *Puggalappasādasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of placing faith in an
individual. What five?

The individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an offense such
that the Saṅgha suspends them. It occurs to them: 'This
person dear and beloved to me has been suspended by the
Saṅgha.' They lose much of their faith in mendicants. So
they don't frequent other mendicants, they don't hear the true teaching,
and they fall away from the true teaching. This is the first drawback in
placing faith in an individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an
offense such that the Saṅgha makes them sit at the end of
the line. ... This is the second drawback in placing faith in an
individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted departs for
another region ... disrobes ... passes away. It occurs to them: 'This
person dear and beloved to me has passed away.' So they don't frequent
other mendicants, they don't hear the true teaching, and they fall away
from the true teaching. This is the fifth drawback in placing faith in
an individual.

These are the five drawbacks of placing faith in an individual."



