# The Chapter on Powers of a Trainee

### AN 5.1 In Brief  *Saṁkhittasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.2 In Detail  *Vitthatasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of conscience? It's when a noble disciple has a
conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful
qualities. This is called the power of conscience.

And what is the power of prudence? It's when a noble disciple is
prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad,
unskillful qualities. This is called the power of prudence.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom. These are the five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.3 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they live unhappily in
this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless.
When a mendicant has these five qualities they live unhappily in this
very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has five qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, distress, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. When
a mendicant has these five qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.4 Cast Down  *Yathābhatasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy,
and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and
wise. A mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.5 Disrobing  *Sikkhāsutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who rejects the training and returns to a
lesser life deserves rebuttal and criticism on five legitimate grounds
in this very life. What five? 'You had no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, or wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or nun who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life deserves rebuttal and
criticism on these five legitimate grounds in this very life.

Any monk or nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and
sadness, weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on five legitimate
grounds in this very life. What five? 'You had faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or
nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness,
weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on these five legitimate
grounds in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.6 Becoming  *Samāpattisutta*

"Mendicants, you don't become unskillful as long as faith is established
in skillful qualities. But when faith vanishes and faithlessness takes
over, you become unskillful.

You don't become unskillful as long as conscience ... prudence ...
energy ... wisdom is established in skillful qualities.

But when wisdom vanishes and witlessness takes over, you become
unskillful."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.7 Sensual Pleasures  *Kāmasutta*

"Mendicants, sentient beings are mostly charmed by sensual pleasures.
When a gentleman has abandoned the scythe and flail and gone forth from
the lay life to homelessness, they're qualified to be called 'a faithful
renunciate from a good family'. Why is that? Because a youth can get
sensual pleasures of this kind or that. Now, all sensual pleasures are
just reckoned as 'sensual pleasures', regardless of whether they're
inferior, average, or superior.

Suppose there was a little baby boy who, because of his nursemaid's
negligence, puts a stick or stone in his mouth. The nursemaid would very
quickly notice and try to take it out. If that didn't work, she'd cradle
his head with her left hand, and take it out using a hooked finger of
her right hand, even if it drew blood. Why is that? I admit she'd know,
'This will distress the child, there's no denying.' Still, it should be
done by a nursemaid who wants what's best for him, out of kindness and
sympathy. And when the boy has grown up and has enough sense, his
nursemaid would not worry about him, thinking: 'The boy can look after
himself. He won't be negligent.'

In the same way, I still need to look after a mendicant who hasn't
finished developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom
regarding skillful qualities. But when a mendicant has finished
developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding
skillful qualities, I need not be concerned, thinking: 'They can look
after themselves. They won't be negligent.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.8 Failure  *Cavanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is
faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and
doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with
these five qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true
teaching.

A mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves
in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and
establishes themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with these five
qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.9 Disrespect (1st)  *Paṭhamaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching.
What five? A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant who is faithless ...
shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. A disrespectful and
irreverent mendicant with these five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail,
and establishes themselves in the true teaching. What five? A respectful
and reverent mendicant who is faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ...
energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching. A respectful and reverent mendicant with these five qualities
doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.10 Disrespect (2nd)  *Dutiyaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training. What five? A disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant who is faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ...
witless can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching
and training. A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with these five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities can achieve
growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What
five? A respectful and reverent mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. A respectful
and reverent mendicant with these five qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training."

