# The Chapter on Kings

### AN 5.131 Wielding Power (1st)  *Paṭhamacakkānuvattanasutta*

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch wields
power only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined
by any human enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch knows what is right, knows principle,
knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. A
wheel-turning monarch who possesses these five factors wields power only
in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities a Realized One, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma
only in a principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone
in the world.

What five? A Realized One knows what is right, knows principle, knows
moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. Possessing
these five qualities a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a principled
manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.132 Wielding Power (2nd)  *Dutiyacakkānuvattanasutta*

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch's eldest
son continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in a
principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son knows what is right,
knows principle, knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the
assembly. A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son who possesses these five
factors continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in
a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities Sāriputta
rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth
by the Realized One. And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic
or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world.

What five? Sāriputta knows what is right, knows principle,
knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly.
Possessing these five qualities Sāriputta rightly keeps
rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One. And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.133 A Principled King  *Dhammarājāsutta*

"Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king,
does not wield power without having their own king."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But who is
the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and principled king?"

"It is principle, monk," said the Buddha.

"Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for
his court, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and
authority.

He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals,
troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics
and brahmins, beasts and birds. When he has done this, he wields power
only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any
human enemy.

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the monks, relying only on principle---honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag,
banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily action should be cultivated.
This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated. This kind of verbal
action should be cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be
cultivated. This kind of mental action should be cultivated. This kind
of mental action should not be cultivated. This kind of livelihood
should be cultivated. This kind of livelihood should not be cultivated.
This kind of village or town should be cultivated. This kind of village
or town should not be cultivated.'

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the nuns ... laymen ... laywomen, relying only on
principle---honoring, respecting, and venerating principle, having
principle as his flag, banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily
action should be cultivated. This kind of bodily action should not be
cultivated. This kind of verbal action should be cultivated. This kind
of verbal action should not be cultivated. This kind of mental action
should be cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be
cultivated. This kind of livelihood should be cultivated. This kind of
livelihood should not be cultivated. This kind of village or town should
be cultivated. This kind of village or town should not be cultivated.'

When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
provided just protection and security for the monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a
principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic
or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.134 In Whatever Region  *Yassaṁdisaṁsutta*

"Mendicants, with five factors an anointed aristocratic king lives in
his own realm, no matter what region he lives in.

What five?

An anointed aristocratic king is well born on both his mother's and
father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is rich, affluent, and wealthy, with a full treasury and storehouses.

He is powerful, having an army of four divisions that is obedient and
carries out instructions.

He has a commander who is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to
think issues through as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

These four things bring his glory to fruition.

With these five qualities, including glory, an anointed aristocratic
king lives in his own realm, no matter what direction he lives in. Why
is that? Because that is how it is for victors.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities lives with mind freed,
no matter what region they live in. What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is like the anointed aristocratic king's impeccable
birth.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is like the anointed aristocratic
king being rich, affluent, and wealthy, with full treasury and
storehouses.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is
like the anointed aristocratic king having power.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This
is like the anointed aristocratic king having a commander.

These four qualities bring their freedom to fruition.

With these five qualities, including freedom, they live in their own
realm, no matter what region they live in. Why is that? Because that is
how it is for those whose mind is free."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.135 Aspiration (1st)  *Paṭhamapatthanāsutta*

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to kingship. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the people of town and country.

He is trained and skilled in the arts of anointed aristocratic kings,
such as elephant riding, horse riding, driving a chariot, archery, and
swordsmanship.

He thinks: 'I'm well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. Why shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to my parents. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to the people of town and country. Why
shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm trained and skilled in the arts of
anointed aristocratic kings, such as elephant riding, horse riding,
driving a chariot, archery, and swordsmanship. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

They're not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the
Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I am a person of faith; I have faith in the Realized One's
awakening ... Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm rarely
ill or unwell. My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. Why shouldn't I aspire to
end the defilements? I'm not devious or deceitful. I reveal myself
honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions. Why shouldn't
I aspire to end the defilements? I live with energy roused up for giving
up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. I'm strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm
wise. I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?'

A mendicant with these five qualities aspires to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.136 Aspiration (2nd)  *Dutiyapatthanāsutta*

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to become a viceroy. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the armed forces.

He is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through
as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

He thinks: 'I'm well born ... attractive ... dear and beloved to my
parents ... dear and beloved to the armed forces ... I'm astute,
competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through as they bear
upon the past, future, and present. Why shouldn't I aspire to become a
viceroy?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to become a viceroy.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I'm ethical ... learned ... mindful ... energetic ... wise.
I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?' A mendicant with these five
qualities aspires to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.137 Little Sleep  *Appaṁsupatisutta*

"Mendicants, these five sleep little at night, staying mostly awake.
What five? A woman longing for a man. A man longing for a woman. A thief
longing for their loot. A king busy with his duties. A mendicant longing
for freedom from the yoke. These five sleep little at night, staying
mostly awake."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.138 Eating Food  *Bhattādakasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors eats food, takes up
space, drops dung, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a
royal bull elephant. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A royal bull
elephant with these five factors eats food, takes up space, drops dung,
and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a royal bull elephant.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities eats food, takes up
space, tramples beds and chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still
considered to be a mendicant. What five? It's when a mendicant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant with
these five qualities eats food, takes up space, tramples beds and
chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a mendicant."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.139 Cannot Endure  *Akkhamasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is not worthy of a
king, not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of
kingship. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sights? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sight
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry. It
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can't endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sounds? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sound
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or
the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure smells? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it smells
the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree royal bull
elephants. It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's
how a royal bull elephant can't endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure tastes? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it misses
a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five meals.
It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a
royal bull elephant can't endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure touches? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when struck by
a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is not worthy of a king,
not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is not worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy
of a religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and
is not the supreme field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a
mendicant can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sights? It's when a
mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is aroused by a desirable
sight, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sounds? It's when a
mendicant, hearing a sound with their ears, is aroused by a desirable
sound, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure smells? It's when a
mendicant, smelling an odor with their nose, is aroused by a desirable
smell, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure tastes? It's when a
mendicant, tasting a flavor with their tongue, is aroused by desirable
tastes, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is aroused by a desirable
touch, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is not worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy of a
religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is
not the supreme field of merit for the world.

A royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What five? It's
when a royal bull elephant can endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sights? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder at the
sight of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of
infantry. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sounds? It's when a
royal bull elephant does not falter or founder at the sound of a
division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or the
thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It stays firm,
and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant can endure
sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure smells? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
smells the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree
royal bull elephants. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how
a royal bull elephant can endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure tastes? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
misses a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five
meals. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure touches? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when
struck by a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows.
It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant
can endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a mendicant can
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sights? It's when a mendicant,
seeing a sight with their eyes, is not aroused by a desirable sight, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sounds? It's when a mendicant,
hearing a sound with their ears, is not aroused by desirable sounds, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure smells? It's when a mendicant,
smelling an odor with their nose, is not aroused by a desirable smell,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure tastes? It's when a mendicant,
tasting a flavor with their tongue, is not aroused by desirable tastes,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is not aroused by a
desirable touch, so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant
can endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.140 A Listener  *Sotasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
five? A royal bull elephant listens, destroys, protects, endures, and
goes fast.

And how does a royal bull elephant listen? It's when a royal bull
elephant pays attention, applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly,
and actively listens to whatever task the elephant trainer has it do,
whether or not it has done it before. That's how a royal bull elephant
listens.

And how does a royal bull elephant destroy? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle destroys elephants with their riders, horses with
their riders, chariots and charioteers, and foot soldiers. That's how a
royal bull elephant destroys.

And how does a royal bull elephant protect? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle protects its fore-quarters and hind-quarters, its
fore-feet and hind-feet, and its head, ears, tusks, trunk, tail, and
rider. That's how a royal bull elephant protects.

And how does a royal bull elephant endure? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and
axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and
cymbals. That's how a royal bull elephant endures.

And how does a royal bull elephant go fast? It's when a royal bull
elephant swiftly goes in whatever direction the elephant trainer sends
it, whether or not it has been there before. That's how a royal bull
elephant goes fast.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? A mendicant listens, destroys,
protects, endures, and goes fast.

And how does a mendicant listen? It's when a mendicant pays attention,
applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens when
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One is being taught.
That's how a mendicant listens.

And how does a mendicant destroy? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's how a
mendicant destroys.

And how does a mendicant protect? When a mendicant sees a sight with the
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
restraint over it. Hearing a sound with the ears ... Smelling an odor
with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with the tongue ... Feeling a touch
with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, they don't get caught
up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. That's
how a mendicant protects.

And how does a mendicant endure? It's when a mendicant endures cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and puts up with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. That's how a mendicant endures.

And how does a mendicant go fast? It's when a mendicant swiftly goes in
the direction they've never gone before in all this long time; that is,
the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. That's how a
mendicant goes fast.

A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

