# The Chapter at Andhakavinda

### AN 5.111 Visiting Families  *Kulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities who visits families is
unlikable and disagreeable, not respected or admired. What five? They
act as though they're close to people they hardly know. They give away
things they don't own. They over-associate with close friends. They
whisper in the ear. And they ask for too much. A mendicant with these
five qualities who visits families is unlikable and disagreeable, not
respected or admired.

A mendicant with five qualities who visits families is dear and beloved,
respected and admired. What five? They don't act as though they're close
to people they hardly know. They don't give away things they don't own.
They don't over-associate with close friends. They don't whisper in the
ear. And they don't ask for too much. A mendicant with these five
qualities who visits families is dear and beloved, respected and
admired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.112 An Ascetic to Follow Behind on Almsround  *Pacchāsamaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, you shouldn't take an ascetic with five qualities to follow
behind on almsround. What five? They walk too far away or too close
behind. They don't take your bowl when it's full. They don't warn you
when your speech is bordering on an offense. They keep on interrupting
while you're speaking. And they're witless, dull, and idiotic. You
shouldn't take an ascetic with these five qualities to follow behind on
almsround.

You should take an ascetic with five qualities to follow behind on
almsround. What five? They don't walk too far away or too close behind.
They take your bowl when it is full. They warn you when your speech is
bordering on an offense. They don't interrupt while you're speaking. And
they're wise, bright, and clever. You should take an ascetic with these
five qualities to follow behind on almsround."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.113 Right Immersion  *Sammāsamādhisutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five qualities can't enter and remain
in right immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these
five qualities can't enter and remain in right immersion.

A mendicant who has five qualities can enter and remain in right
immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these five qualities
can enter and remain in right immersion."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.114 At Andhakavinda  *Andhakavindasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at
Andhakavinda. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly
come to this teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and
established in five things. What five?

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in restraint in
the monastic code: 'Reverends, please be ethical. Live restrained in the
monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules
you've undertaken.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in sense
restraint: 'Reverends, please live with sense doors guarded, mindfully
alert and on guard, with protected mind, having a heart protected by
mindfulness.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in limiting their
speech: 'Reverends, please speak little. Put a limit on your speech.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in retreat:
'Reverends, please live in the wilderness. Frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in right
perspective: 'Reverends, please hold right view and have right
perspective.'

Those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this
teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and established
in these five things."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.115 Stingy  *Maccharinīsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
She is stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? She is not
stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, or the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.116 Praise  *Vaṇṇanāsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She arouses faith
in things that are dubious, and doesn't arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She doesn't arouse faith in
things that are dubious, and does arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.117 Jealous  *Issukinīsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She is jealous,
stingy, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She is not jealous, or stingy,
and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.118 Having Wrong View  *Micchādiṭṭhikasutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong view
and wrong thought, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right view and right
thought, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.119 Wrong Speech  *Micchāvācāsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
speech and wrong action, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right speech and right
action, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 5.120 Wrong Effort  *Micchāvāyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
effort and wrong mindfulness, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun
with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right effort and right
mindfulness, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

