# The Chapter on Worthy of Offerings

### N 6.1 Worthy of Offerings (1st)  *Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who, when they see a sight with their eyes, is neither
happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad.
They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### N 6.2 Worthy of Offerings (2nd)  *Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.3 Faculties  *Indriyasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.4 Powers  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The powers of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.5 The Thoroughbred (1st)  *Paṭhamaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

What six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's beautiful. A fine royal
thoroughbred with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.6 The Thoroughbred (2nd)  *Dutiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's strong. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

### N 6.7 The Thoroughbred (3rd)  *Tatiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's fast. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.8 Unsurpassable  *Anuttariyasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things are unsurpassable. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection. These are the six unsurpassable things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.9 Topics for Recollection  *Anussatiṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six topics for recollection. What six? The
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
ethics, generosity, and the deities. These are the six topics for
recollection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.10 With Mahānāma  *Mahānāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahānāma
the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him:

"Sir, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions, what kind of meditation do they frequently practice?"

"Mahānāma, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and
understood the instructions they frequently practice this kind of
meditation.

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who
lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled
among people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the
teaching and develop the recollection of the Buddha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called
a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced,
and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the teaching.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct,
which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When a noble
disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a noble disciple who lives
in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
develop the recollection of ethics.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of generosity.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and
gods even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here,
they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
the deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple
whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the
teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. When you're joyful,
rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes
tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel bliss. And when you're
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is
called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are
unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've
entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the
deities.

When a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions this is the kind of meditation they frequently practice."

