# The Chapter on Perfection

### AN 6.75 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six qualities they live unhappily in
this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What six?
Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and
cruel perceptions. When a mendicant has these six qualities they live
unhappily in this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and
when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has six qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What six? Thoughts of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. And perceptions of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. When a mendicant has these
six qualities they live happily in this very life---without distress,
anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect a good rebirth."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.76 Perfection  *Arahattasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex,
overestimation, obstinacy, and groveling. Without giving up these six
qualities you can't realize perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex, overestimation,
obstinacy, and groveling. After giving up these six things you can
realize perfection."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.77 Superhuman States  *Uttarimanussadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six qualities you can't realize a
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
What six? Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding
the sense doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't realize a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

But after giving up six qualities you can realize a superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. What six?
Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding the sense
doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. After giving up these six
qualities you can realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.78 Joy and Happiness  *Sukhasomanassasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six things they're full of joy and
happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements. What six? It's when a mendicant enjoys the
teaching, meditation, giving up, seclusion, kindness, and
non-proliferation. When a mendicant has these six things they're full of
joy and happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork
for ending the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.79 Achievement  *Adhigamasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in progress,
skilled in regress, or skilled in means. They don't generate enthusiasm
to achieve skillful qualities not yet achieved. They don't protect
skillful qualities they have achieved. And they don't try to persevere
in the task. A mendicant who has these six qualities is unable to
acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities
they've already acquired.

A mendicant who has six qualities is able to acquire more skillful
qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in progress,
skilled in regress, and skilled in means. They generate enthusiasm to
achieve skillful qualities not yet achieved. They protect skillful
qualities they have achieved. And they try to persevere in the task. A
mendicant who has these six qualities is able to acquire more skillful
qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.80 Greatness  *Mahantattasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities soon acquires great and
abundant good qualities. What six? It's when a mendicant is full of
light, full of practice, full of inspiration, and full of eagerness.
They don't slack off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.
They reach further. A mendicant who has these six qualities soon
acquires great and abundant good qualities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.81 Hell (1st)  *Paá¹­hamanirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they have corrupt wishes and wrong view. Someone with these six
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And they
have few desires and right view. Someone with these six qualities is
raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.82 Hell (2nd)  *Dutiyanirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they're greedy and rude. Someone with these six qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And
they're not greedy or rude. Someone with these six qualities is raised
up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.83 The Best Thing  *Aggadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize the best
thing, perfection. What six? It's when a mendicant is faithless,
shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. And they're concerned with
their body and their life. A mendicant with these six qualities can't
realize the best thing, perfection.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize the best thing, perfection.
What six? It's when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
energetic, and wise. And they have no concern for their body and their
life. A mendicant with these six qualities can realize the best thing,
perfection."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.84 Day and Night  *Rattidivasasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six?
It's when a mendicant has many desires---they're frustrated and not
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And they're faithless, unethical, unmindful, and
witless. A mendicant with these six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

A mendicant with six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six? It's when a
mendicant doesn't have many desires---they're not frustrated but content
with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies
for the sick. And they're faithful, ethical, mindful, and wise. A
mendicant with these six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

