# The Chapter on Deities

### AN 6.65 The Fruit of Non-Return  *Anāgāmiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize the fruit of
non-return. What six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness,
unmindfulness, and witlessness. Without giving up these six things you
can't realize the fruit of non-return.

After giving up six things you can realize the fruit of non-return. What
six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness, unmindfulness,
and witlessness. After giving up these six things you can realize the
fruit of non-return."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.66 Perfection  *Arahattasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith,
and negligence. Without giving up these six things you can't realize
perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith, and
negligence. After giving up these six things you can realize
perfection."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.67 Friends  *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant with bad friends,
companions, and associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and
attending, and following their example, will fulfill the practice
dealing with the supplementary regulations. Without fulfilling the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's impossible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling the practice of a
trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without fulfilling ethics,
it's impossible to give up sensual desire, or desire to be reborn in the
realm of luminous form or in the formless realm.

It's quite possible that a mendicant with good friends, companions, and
associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and attending, and
following their example, will fulfill the practice dealing with the
supplementary regulations. Having fulfilled the practice dealing with
supplementary regulations, it's possible to fulfill the practice of a
trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a trainee, it's possible to
fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's possible to give up
sensual desire, and desire to be reborn in the realm of luminous form
and in the formless realm."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.68 Enjoying Company  *Saṅgaṇikārāmasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant who enjoys company
and groups, who loves them and likes to enjoy them, should take pleasure
in being alone in seclusion. Without taking pleasure in being alone in
seclusion, it's impossible to learn the patterns of the mind. Without
learning the patterns of the mind, it's impossible to fulfill right
view. Without fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right
immersion. Without fulfilling right immersion, it's impossible to give
up the fetters. Without giving up the fetters, it's impossible to
realize extinguishment.

It's quite possible that a mendicant who doesn't enjoy company and
groups, who doesn't love them and like to enjoy them, should take
pleasure in being alone in seclusion. For someone who takes pleasure in
being alone in seclusion, it's possible to learn the patterns of the
mind. For someone who learns the patterns of the mind, it's possible to
fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's possible to
fulfill right immersion. Having fulfilled right immersion, it's possible
to give up the fetters. Having given up the fetters, it's possible to
realize extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.69 A God  *Devatāsutta*

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What
six? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the
Saṅgha, for the training; being easy to admonish, and good
friendship. These six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's Grove, came to
me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What six? Respect for the
Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the
training; being easy to admonish, and good friendship. These six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher
and praises such respect. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
such respect to respect the Teacher. And they praise other mendicants
who respect the Teacher at the right time, truthfully and correctly.
They personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the
Saṅgha ... They personally respect the training ... They
are personally easy to admonish ... They personally have good friends,
and praise such friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
good friends to develop good friendship. And they praise other
mendicants who have good friends at the right time, truthfully and
correctly. That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the
detailed meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher ... They
personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the
Saṅgha ... They personally respect the training ... They
are personally easy to admonish ... They personally have good friends,
and praise such friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
good friends to develop good friendship. And they praise other
mendicants who have good friends at the right time, truthfully and
correctly. This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said
in brief."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.70 Immersion  *Samādhisutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant without immersion
that is peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many
kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again;
appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a
rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the
earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying
cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the
hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as
far as the realm of divinity.

It's impossible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.

It's impossible that they'll understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with their own mind, understanding
mind with greed as 'mind with greed' ... and freed mind as 'freed mind'.

It's impossible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's impossible that with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses
the human, they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according
to their deeds.

It's impossible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

But it's quite possible that a mendicant who has immersion that is
peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many kinds of
psychic power ...

It's possible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds ...

It's possible that they'll understand the minds of other beings ...

It's possible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's possible that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds.

It's possible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.71 Capable of Realizing  *Sakkhibhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is incapable of realizing
anything that can be realized, since each and every one is within range.
What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't truly understand which qualities
make things worse, which keep things steady, which lead to distinction,
and which lead to penetration. And they don't practice carefully or do
what's suitable. A mendicant with these six qualities is incapable of
realizing anything that can be realized, since each and every one is
within range.

A mendicant with six qualities is capable of realizing anything that can
be realized, since each and every one is within range. What six? It's
when a mendicant truly understands which qualities make things worse,
which keep things steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to
penetration. And they practice carefully and do what's suitable. A
mendicant with these six qualities is capable of realizing anything that
can be realized, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.72 Strength  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities can't attain strength in
immersion. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in entering
immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion, or skilled in emerging
from immersion. And they don't practice carefully and persistently, and
they don't do what's suitable. A mendicant who has these six qualities
can't attain strength in immersion.

A mendicant who has six qualities can attain strength in immersion. What
six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in
remaining in immersion, and skilled in emerging from immersion. And they
practice carefully and persistently, and do what's suitable. A mendicant
who has these six qualities can attain strength in immersion."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.73 First Absorption (1st)  *Paṭhamatajjhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
And the drawbacks of sensual pleasures have not been truly seen clearly
with right wisdom. Without giving up these six qualities you can't enter
and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. And the
drawbacks of sensual pleasures have been truly seen clearly with right
wisdom. After giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in
the first absorption."

<!--pg-->
### AN 6.74 First Absorption (2nd)  *Dutiyatajjhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't enter and remain in the first
absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and
sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. After giving up these six
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

