# The Chapter on Triads

### N 6.107 Greed  *Rāgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and
delusion. These are the three things. To give up these three things you
should develop three things. What three? You should develop the
perception of ugliness to give up greed, love to give up hate, and
wisdom to give up delusion. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.108 Bad Conduct  *Duccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop good bodily conduct to give up bad bodily conduct, good
verbal conduct to give up bad verbal conduct, and good mental conduct to
give up bad mental conduct. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.109 Thoughts  *Vitakkasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel thoughts. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop thoughts of renunciation to give up sensual thoughts,
thoughts of good will to give up malicious thoughts, and thoughts of
harmlessness to give up cruel thoughts. These are the three things you
should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.110 Perceptions  *Saññāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel perceptions. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop perceptions of renunciation to give up sensual
perceptions, perceptions of good will to give up malicious perceptions,
and perceptions of harmlessness to give up cruel perceptions. These are
the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.111 Elements  *Dhātusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The elements of
sensuality, malice, and cruelty. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop the element of renunciation to give up the element of
sensuality, the element of good will to give up the element of malice,
and the element of harmlessness to give up the element of cruelty. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.112 Gratification  *Assādasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The view that
things are gratifying, the view of self, and wrong view. These are the
three things. To give up these three things you should develop three
things. What three? You should develop the perception of impermanence to
give up the view that things are gratifying; the perception of not-self
to give up the view of self; and right view to give up wrong view. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.113 Discontent  *Aratisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Discontent,
cruelty, and unprincipled conduct. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop rejoicing to give up discontent, harmlessness to give up
cruelty, and principled conduct to give up unprincipled conduct. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.114 Contentment  *Santuṭṭhitāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Lack of
contentment, lack of situational awareness, and having many wishes.
These are the three things. To give up these three things you should
develop three things. What three? You should develop contentment to give
up lack of contentment, situational awareness to give up lack of
situational awareness, and having few wishes to give up having many
wishes. These are the three things you should develop to give up those
three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.115 Hard to Admonish  *Dovacassatāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Being hard to
admonish, bad friendship, and a scattered mind. These are the three
things. To give up these three things you should develop three things.
What three? You should develop being easy to admonish to give up being
hard to admonish, good friendship to give up bad friendship, and
mindfulness of breathing to give up a scattered mind. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.116 Restlessness  *Uddhaccasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Restlessness,
lack of restraint, and negligence. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop serenity to give up restlessness, restraint to give up
lack of restraint, and diligence to give up negligence. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

