# The Chapter on Benefit

### N 6.96 Appearance  *Pātubhāvasutta*

"Mendicants, the appearance of six things is rare in the world. What
six? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A teacher
of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. Rebirth in a
civilized region. Unimpaired sense faculties. Being bright and clever.
Enthusiasm for skillful qualities. The appearance of these six things is
rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.97 Benefit  *Ānisaṁsasutta*

"Mendicants, these are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry. What six? You're bound for the true teaching. You're not
liable to decline. You suffer only for a limited period. You have
unshared knowledge. You've clearly seen causes and the phenomena that
arise from causes. These are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.98 Impermanence  *Aniccasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as permanent to accept views that conform with the teaching.
Without accepting views that conform with the teaching, it's impossible
to enter the sure path. Without entering the sure path, it's impossible
to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or
perfection.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
impermanent to accept views that conform with the teaching. Having
accepted views that conform with the teaching, it's possible to enter
the sure path. Having entered the sure path, it's possible to realize
the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.99 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as pleasurable to accept views that agree with the teaching.
... It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
suffering to accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.100 Not-Self  *Anattasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as self to accept views that agree with the teaching. ... It's
quite possible for a mendicant who regards all things as not-self to
accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.101 Extinguished  *Nibbānasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards
extinguishment as suffering to accept views that conform with the
teaching. ...

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards extinguishment as
pleasurable to accept views that conform with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.102 Transience  *Anavatthitasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of impermanence in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'All conditions will appear to me as transient.' 'My mind will not
delight anywhere in the world.' 'My mind will rise above the whole
world.' 'My mind will incline to extinguishment.' 'My fetters will be
given up.' 'I will achieve the ultimate goal of the ascetic life.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
impermanence in all conditions without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.103 With a Drawn Sword  *Ukkhittāsikasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of suffering in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'Perception of disillusionment will be established in me for all
conditions, like a killer with a drawn sword.' 'My mind will rise above
the whole world.' 'I will see extinguishment as peaceful.' 'My
underlying tendencies will be uprooted.' 'I will fulfill my duty.' 'I
will have served my Teacher with love.' Seeing these six benefits is
quite enough to establish the perception of suffering in all conditions
without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.104 Not Determined by Anything  *Atammayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of not-self in all things without qualification. What six? 'I
will not be determined by anything in the world.' 'My I-making will
stop.' 'My mine-making will stop.' 'I will have unshared knowledge.' 'I
will clearly see causes and the phenomena that arise from causes.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
not-self in all things without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.105 States of Existence  *Bhavasutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up these three states of existence. And you
should train in three trainings. What are the three states of existence
you should give up? Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of
luminous form, and the formless realm. These are the three states of
existence you should give up. What are the three trainings you should
train in? The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three trainings you should train in. When a
mendicant has given up these three states of existence and has trained
in these three trainings they're called a mendicant who has cut off
craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has
made an end of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.106 Craving  *Taṇhāsutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up these three cravings and three conceits.
What three cravings should you give up? Craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. These are
the three cravings you should give up. What three conceits should you
give up? Conceit, inferiority complex, and superiority complex. These
are the three conceits you should give up. When a mendicant has given up
these three cravings and these three conceits they're called a mendicant
who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly
comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering."

