# The Chapter on Ascetics

### AN 7.85 A Mendicant  *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of breaking seven things that you become a
mendicant. What seven? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, greed, hate, delusion, and conceit. It's
because of breaking these seven things that you become a mendicant."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.86 An Ascetic  *Samaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of quelling seven things that you become an
ascetic ..."

### AN 7.87 Brahmin  *Brāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of barring out seven things that you become a
brahmin ..."

### AN 7.88 Scholar  *Sottiyasutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of scouring off seven things that you become a
scholar ..."

### AN 7.89 Bathed  *Nhātakasutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of bathing off seven things that you become a
bathed initiate ..."

### AN 7.90 A Knowledge Master  *Vedagūsutta*

"Mendicants, it's because of knowing seven things that you become a
knowledge master ..."

### AN 7.91 A Noble One  *Ariyasutta*

"Mendicants, it's because seven foes have been nobbled that you become a
noble one ..."

### AN 7.92 A Perfected One  *Arahāsutta*

"Mendicants, it's by being impeccably remote from seven things that you
become a perfected one. What seven? Substantialist view, doubt,
misapprehension of precepts and observances, greed, hate, delusion, and
conceit. It's because of being impeccably remote from these seven things
that you become a perfected one."

### AN 7.93 Bad Qualities  *Asaddhammasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven bad qualities. What seven? Someone is
faithless, shameless, imprudent, unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and
witless. These are the seven bad qualities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.94 Good Qualities  *Saddhammasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven good qualities. What seven? Someone
is faithful, conscientious, prudent, learned, energetic, mindful, and
wise. These are the seven good qualities."

<!--pg-->
# The Chapter on Worthy of Offerings

### AN 7.95 Observing Impermanence in the Eye  *\~*

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye.
They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence. Constantly,
continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind and fathom
with wisdom. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the first person
who is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality,
worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms,
and is the supreme field of merit for the world.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. ...
Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly the same
time. This is the second person who is worthy of offerings ...

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in the eye. ...
With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between
one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. ... This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.96--614 Observing Suffering in the Eye, Etc.  *\~*

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings ... What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing suffering in the eye. ...
observing not-self in the eye. ... observing ending in the eye. ...
observing vanishing in the eye. ... observing fading away in the eye.
... observing cessation in the eye. ... observing letting go in the eye.
...

ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ...

sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas ...

eye consciousness ... ear consciousness ... nose consciousness ...
tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness ...

eye contact ... ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact ... body
contact ... mind contact ...

feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling
born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born
of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact ...

perception of sights ... perception of sounds ... perception of smells
... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception of
ideas ...

intention regarding sights ... intention regarding sounds ... intention
regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention regarding
touches ... intention regarding ideas ...

craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for smells ...
craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for ideas ...

thoughts about sights ... thoughts about sounds ... thoughts about
smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ... thoughts
about ideas ...

considerations regarding sights ... considerations regarding sounds ...
considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding tastes ...
considerations regarding touches ... considerations regarding ideas ...

meditates observing impermanence in the five aggregates ... the
aggregate of form ... the aggregate of feeling ... the aggregate of
perception ... the aggregate of choices ... the aggregate of
consciousness ... meditates observing suffering ... not-self ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... letting go ..."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### AN 7.615 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The awakening factor of mindfulness ... the awakening factor
of equanimity. These seven things should be developed for insight into
greed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.616 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The perception of impermanence, the perception of not-self,
the perception of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the perception
of giving up, the perception of fading away, and the perception of
cessation. These seven things should be developed for insight into
greed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.617 Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd)  *\~*

"Mendicants, for insight into greed, seven things should be developed.
What seven? The perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food,
dissatisfaction with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in
impermanence, and not-self in suffering. These seven things should be
developed for insight into greed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.618--644 Untitled Discourses on Greed  *\~*

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... For the letting go of greed, these seven things should be
developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.645--1124 Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc.  *\~*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... letting go of negligence these seven things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.




