# The Chapter on the Monastic Law

### AN 7.75 An Expert in the Monastic Law (1st)  *Paṭhamavinayadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this
life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities is an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.76 An Expert in the Monastic Law (2nd)  *Dutiyavinayadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in
detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules
and accompanying material. They get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind---when they
want, without trouble or difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. A
mendicant with these seven qualities is an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.77 An Expert in the Monastic Law (3rd)  *Tatiyavinayadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're firm and unfaltering in the training. They
get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong
to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. They
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities is an
expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.78 An Expert in the Monastic Law (4th)  *Catutthavinayadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities is an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities is
an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.79 Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (1st)  *Paṭhamavinayadharasobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places;
seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the
present life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with
these seven qualities shines as an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.80 Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (2nd)  *Dutiyavinayadharasobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in
detail, well analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules
and accompanying material. They get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind---when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. They realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities shines as an expert
in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.81 Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (3rd)  *Tatiyavinayadharasobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They're firm and unfaltering in the training. They
get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in the present life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven
qualities shines as an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.82 Shines as an Expert in the Monastic Law (4th)  *Catutthavinayadharasobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with seven qualities shines as an expert in the
monastic law. What seven? They know what is an offense. They know what
is not an offense. They know what is a light offense. They know what is
a serious offense. They recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. A mendicant with these seven qualities
shines as an expert in the monastic law."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.83 The Teacher's Instructions  *Satthusāsanasutta*

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Upāli, you might know that certain things don't lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment. Categorically, you should remember these
things as not the teaching, not the training, and not the Teacher's
instructions. You might know that certain things do lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. Categorically, you should remember these things as the
teaching, the training, and the Teacher's instructions."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.84 Settlement of Disciplinary Issues  *Adhikaraṇasamathasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven principles for the settlement of any
disciplinary issues that might arise. What seven? Resolution
face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through recollection to be
granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be granted. Acting
according to what has been admitted. Majority decision. Further penalty.
Covering over as if with grass. These are the seven principles for the
settlement of any disciplinary issues that might arise."

