# The Chapter on Earthquakes

### AN 8.61 Desire  *Icchāsutta*

"Mendicants, these eight people are found in the world. What eight?

First, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. And so they sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion because
they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant who
lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. And so they become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they acquire material
things, they become intoxicated and negligent. They've fallen from the
true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. And so they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true
teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. And so they
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. But when
they acquire material things, they become intoxicated and negligent.
They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. But they don't sorrow
and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion
because they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant
who lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. But they don't become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they acquire material
things, they don't become intoxicated and negligent. They haven't fallen
from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. But they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from
the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. But they don't
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. And when
they acquire material things, they don't become intoxicated and
negligent. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

These are the eight people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.62 Good Enough  *Alaṁsutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is good enough for
themselves and others. What six? A mendicant is quick-witted when it
comes to skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've
heard. They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized.
Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly.
They're a good speaker who enunciates well. Their voice is polished,
clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage,
fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these
six qualities is good enough for themselves and others.

A mendicant with five qualities is good enough for themselves and
others. What five? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good
speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the
meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these five qualities is good enough for
themselves and others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. But they're not
a good speaker and do not enunciate well. Their voice isn't polished,
clear, articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these four qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker who enunciates well. Their voice is
polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these four qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. But they're not
a good speaker and do not enunciate well. Their voice isn't polished,
clear, articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these three qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. But they examine the meaning of teachings they have
memorized. Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice
accordingly. They're not a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished,
clear, articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. Nor do they examine the meaning of teachings they've
memorized. Not understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't
practice accordingly. But they're a good speaker who enunciates well.
Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning.
They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these two qualities is good enough for
others but not for themselves."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.63 A Teaching in Brief  *Saṁkhittasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"This is exactly how some silly people ask me for something. But when
the teaching has been explained they think only of following me around."

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy One
teach me the Dhamma in brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of
what the Buddha says! Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's
teaching!"

"Well then, mendicant, you should train like this: 'My mind will be
steady and well settled internally. And bad, unskillful qualities that
have arisen will not occupy my mind.' That's how you should train.

When your mind is steady and well settled internally, and bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen don't occupy your mind, then you
should train like this: 'I will develop the heart's release by love.
I'll cultivate it, make it my vehicle and my basis, keep it up,
consolidate it, and properly implement it.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is developed and cultivated in this way, you should
develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You should
develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected. You
should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without rapture.
You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed in this way, you should train like
this: 'I will develop the heart's release by compassion ...' ... 'I will
develop the heart's release by rejoicing ...' ... 'I will develop the
heart's release by equanimity. I'll cultivate it, make it my vehicle and
my basis, keep it up, consolidate it, and properly implement it.' That's
how you should train.

When this immersion is well developed in this way, you should develop it
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You should develop it
without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. You should
develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected. You should
develop it with rapture. You should develop it without rapture. You
should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed in this way, you should train like
this: 'I'll meditate observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.' That's how
you should train.

When this immersion is developed and cultivated in this way, you should
develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You should
develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected. You
should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without rapture.
You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed in this way, you should train like
this: 'I'll meditate on an aspect of feelings ...' ... 'I'll meditate on
an aspect of the mind ...' ... 'I'll meditate on an aspect of
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world.' That's how you should train.

When this immersion is developed and cultivated in this way, you should
develop it while placing the mind and keeping it connected. You should
develop it without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. You
should develop it without placing the mind or keeping it connected. You
should develop it with rapture. You should develop it without rapture.
You should develop it with pleasure. You should develop it with
equanimity.

When this immersion is well developed in this way, wherever you walk,
you'll walk comfortably. Wherever you stand, you'll stand comfortably.
Wherever you sit, you'll sit comfortably. Wherever you lie down, you'll
lie down comfortably."

When that mendicant had been given this advice by the Buddha, he got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.64 At Gayā Head  *Gayāsīsasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Gayā on
Gayā Head. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still not awake but intent
on awakening---I perceived light but did not see forms.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to both perceive light and see
forms? Then my knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time, living diligent, keen, and resolute, I perceived
light and saw forms. But I didn't associate with those deities,
converse, or engage in discussion.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion?
Then my knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time ... I perceived light and saw forms. And I associated
with those deities, conversed, and engaged in discussion. But I didn't
know which orders of gods those deities came from.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion;
and find out which orders of gods those deities come from? Then my
knowledge and vision would become even more purified.'

So after some time ... I perceived light and saw forms. And I associated
with those deities ... And I found out which orders of gods those
deities came from. But I didn't know what deeds caused those deities to
be reborn there after passing away from here.

So after some time ... I found out what deeds caused those deities to be
reborn there after passing away from here. But I didn't know what deeds
caused those deities to have such food and such an experience of
pleasure and pain.

So after some time ... I found out what deeds caused those deities to
have such food and such an experience of pleasure and pain. But I didn't
know that these deities have a lifespan of such a length.

So after some time ... I found out that these deities have a lifespan of
such a length. But I didn't know whether or not I had previously lived
together with those deities.

Then it occurred to me, 'What if I were to perceive light and see forms;
and associate with those deities, converse, and engage in discussion;
and find out which orders of gods those deities come from; and what
deeds caused those deities to be reborn there after passing away from
here; and what deeds caused those deities to have such food and such an
experience of pleasure and pain; and that these deities have a lifespan
of such a length; and whether or not I have previously lived together
with those deities? Then my knowledge and vision would become even more
purified.'

So after some time ... I found out whether or not I have previously
lived together with those deities.

As long as my knowledge and vision about the deities was not fully
purified in these eight rounds, I didn't announce my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

But when my knowledge and vision about the deities was fully purified in
these eight rounds, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. Knowledge and
vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth;
now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.65 Dimensions of Mastery  *Abhibhāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight dimensions of mastery. What eight?

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I
know and see.' This is the fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, yellow,
with yellow color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive:
'I know and see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, red, with
red color and red appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, white,
with white color and white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I
know and see.' This is the eighth dimension of mastery.

These are the eight dimensions of mastery."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.66 Liberations  *Vimokkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight liberations. What eight? Having
physical form, they see forms. This is the first liberation.

Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally. This is the
second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.

These are the eight liberations."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.67 Ignoble Expressions  *Anariyavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight ignoble expressions. What eight?
Saying you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, but you haven't.
And saying you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you
have. These are the eight ignoble expressions."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.68 Noble Expressions  *Ariyavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight noble expressions. What eight? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you haven't.
And saying you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you
have. These are the eight noble expressions."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.69 Assemblies  *Parisāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight assemblies. What eight? The
assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics. An
assembly of the gods of the four great kings. An assembly of the gods of
the thirty-three. An assembly of Māras. An assembly of
divinities.

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of aristocrats. There
I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?'

I recall having approached an assembly of hundreds of brahmins ...
householders ... ascetics ... the gods of the four great kings ... the
gods of the thirty-three ... Māras ... divinities. There
too I used to sit with them, converse, and engage in discussion. And my
appearance and voice became just like theirs. I educated, encouraged,
fired up, and inspired them with a Dhamma talk. But when I spoke they
didn't know: 'Who is this that speaks? Is it a god or a human?' And when
my Dhamma talk was finished I vanished. But when I vanished they didn't
know: 'Who was that who vanished? Was it a god or a human?' These are
the eight assemblies."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.70 Earthquakes  *Bhūmicālasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, get your
sitting cloth. Let's go to the Cāpāla shrine for the day's
meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. Taking his sitting cloth he followed behind
the Buddha.

Then the Buddha went up to the Cāpāla shrine, where he sat
on the seat spread out. When he was seated he said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

For a second time ...

And for a third time, the Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, Vesālī is lovely. And the Udena, Gotamaka, Seven
Maidens, Many Sons, Sārandada, and Cāpāla
Tree-shrines are all lovely. Whoever has developed and cultivated the
four bases of psychic power---made them a vehicle and a basis, kept them
up, consolidated them, and properly implemented them---may, if they
wish, live for the proper lifespan or what's left of it. The Realized
One has developed and cultivated the four bases of psychic power, made
them a vehicle and a basis, kept them up, consolidated them, and
properly implemented them. If he wished, the Realized One could live for
the proper lifespan or what's left of it."

But Ānanda didn't get it, even though the Buddha dropped such an obvious
hint, such a clear sign. He didn't beg the Buddha, "Sir, may the Blessed
One please remain for the eon! May the Holy One please remain for the
eon! That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans." For his mind was as if possessed by Māra.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Go now, Ānanda, at your
convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied Ānanda. He rose from his seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before
sitting at the root of a tree close by.

And then, not long after Ānanda had left, Māra the Wicked
said to the Buddha:

"Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One
now be fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment
of the Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have monk disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned, have memorized the teachings, and practice in line
with the teachings; not until they practice appropriately, living in
line with the teaching; not until they've learned their tradition, and
explain, teach, assert, establish, clarify, analyze, and reveal; not
until they can legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of
others that come up, and teach with a demonstrable basis.' Today you do
have such monk disciples.

May the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One now be
fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the
Buddha.

Sir, you once made this statement: 'Wicked One, I shall not be fully
extinguished until I have nun disciples who are competent, educated,
assured, learned ...' ...

'Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have layman
disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ...

'Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until I have laywoman
disciples who are competent, educated, assured, learned ...' ... Today
you do have such laywoman disciples.

Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One be
fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the
Buddha. Sir, you once made this statement:

'Wicked One, I shall not be fully extinguished until my spiritual path
is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.' Today your spiritual
path is successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and
well proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans.

Sir, may the Blessed One now be fully extinguished! May the Holy One be
fully extinguished! Now is the time for the full extinguishment of the
Buddha."

"Relax, Wicked One. The full extinguishment of the Realized One will be
soon. Three months from now the Realized One will be fully
extinguished."

So at the Cāpāla Tree-shrine the Buddha, mindful and aware,
surrendered the life force. When he did so there was a great earthquake,
awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and thunder cracked the sky. Then,
understanding this matter, on that occasion the Buddha expressed this
heartfelt sentiment:

> "Comparing the incomparable\
> \>with the creation of prolonged life,\
> the sage surrendered the life force.\
> Happy inside, serene,\
> he shattered self-creation like a suit of armor."

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "That was a really big earthquake! That
was really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky! What's the cause, what's the reason for a great
earthquake?"

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, that was a really big earthquake! That was
really a very big earthquake; awe-inspiring and hair-raising, and
thunder cracked the sky! What's the cause, what's the reason for a great
earthquake?"

"Ānanda, there are these eight causes and reasons for a great
earthquake. What eight?

This great earth is grounded on water, the water is grounded on air, and
the air stands in space. At a time when a great wind blows, it stirs the
water, and the water stirs the earth. This is the first cause and reason
for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, there is an ascetic or brahmin with psychic power who has
achieved mastery of the mind, or a god who is mighty and powerful.
They've developed a limited perception of earth and a limitless
perception of water. They make the earth shake and rock and tremble.
This is the second cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening passes away from the
host of joyful gods, he's conceived in his mother's belly, mindful and
aware. Then the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the third
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the being intent on awakening comes out of his
mother's belly mindful and aware, the earth shakes and rocks and
trembles. This is the fourth cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One realizes the supreme perfect
awakening, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the fifth
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One rolls forth the supreme Wheel of
Dhamma, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the sixth cause
and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One, mindful and aware, surrenders the
life force, the earth shakes and rocks and trembles. This is the seventh
cause and reason for a great earthquake.

Furthermore, when the Realized One becomes fully extinguished in the
element of extinguishment with no residue, the earth shakes and rocks
and trembles. This is the eighth cause and reason for a great
earthquake.

These are the eight causes and reasons for a great earthquake."

