# The Chapter on Mindfulness Meditation

### AN 9.63 Weaknesses in Training and Mindfulness Meditation  *Sikkhādubbalyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind ... They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
To give up those five weaknesses in your training you should develop
these four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.64 Hindrances  *Nīvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five hindrances. What five? Sensual desire,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
These are the five hindrances.

To give up these five hindrances you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of the mind ...
They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. To give up
those five hindrances you should develop these four kinds of mindfulness
meditation."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.65 Kinds of Sensual Stimulation  *Kāmaguṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What
five? Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation.

To give up these five kinds of sensual stimulation you should develop
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.66 Grasping Aggregates  *Upādānakkhandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? The
grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. These are the five grasping aggregates.

To give up these five grasping aggregates you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.67 Lower Fetters  *Orambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five lower fetters. What five? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

To give up these five lower fetters you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.68 Places of Rebirth  *Gatisutta*

"Mendicants, there are five destinations. What five? Hell, the animal
realm, the ghost realm, humanity, and the gods. These are the five
destinations.

To give up these five destinations you should develop the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.69 Stinginess  *Macchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of stinginess. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teaching. These are the five kinds of stinginess.

To give up these five kinds of stinginess you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.70 Higher Fetters  *Uddhambhāgiyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

To give up these five higher fetters you should develop the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.71 Hard-heartedness  *Cetokhilasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five kinds of hard-heartedness. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset
with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness.

To give up these five kinds of hard-heartedness you should develop the
four kinds of mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.72 Shackles of the Heart  *Cetasovinibandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind
doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the first shackle of the heart.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart. These are the five
shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation. What four? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of
the mind ... They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop these
four kinds of mindfulness meditation."

