# The Chapter on Bases of Psychic Power

### AN 9.83 Weaknesses in Training and the Bases of Psychic Power  *Sikkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. To give up these five weaknesses in your
training you should develop these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.84--91 Hindrances, Etc.  *Nīvaraṇasuttādi*

*(Tell in full as in the chapter on mindfulness meditation.)*

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.92 Shackles of the Heart  *Cetasovinibandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed for sensual pleasures. ...
These are the five shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry,
and active effort. To give up these five shackles of the heart you
should develop these four bases of psychic power."
