# The Chapter on a Safe Place

### AN 9.52 A Safe Place  *Khemasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'a safe place'. In what way did the Buddha
speak of a safe place?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of a safe place in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of a safe
place in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.53 Reaching a Safe Place  *Khemappattasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching a safe place'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.54 Freedom From Death  *Amatasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'freedom from death'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.55 Reaching Freedom From Death  *Amatappattasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching freedom from death'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.56 A Place Without Fear  *Abhayasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'a place without fear'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.57 Reaching a Place Without Fear  *Abhayappattasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'reaching a place without fear'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.58 Tranquility  *Passaddhisutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'tranquility'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.59 Progressive Tranquility  *Anupubbapassaddhisutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'progressive tranquility'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.60 Cessation  *Nirodhasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'cessation'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.61 Progressive Cessation  *Anupubbanirodhasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'progressive cessation'. What is the
progressive cessation that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of progressive cessation in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
progressive cessation in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.62 Requirements for Perfection  *Abhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up nine things you can't realize perfection.
What nine? Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt,
jealousy, and stinginess. Without giving up these nine things you can't
realize perfection.

After giving up nine things you can realize perfection. What nine?
Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy, and
stinginess. After giving up these nine things you can realize the fruit
of perfection."

