# The Chapter on Awakening

### AN 9.1 Awakening  *Sambodhisutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
what is the vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors?' How would you answer them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ... The mendicants will listen
and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
what is the vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors?' You should answer them:

'It's when a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This is the first vital condition for the development of the awakening
factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is the second vital condition for the development of
the awakening factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom,
freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. This is the third
vital condition for the development of the awakening factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the fourth vital condition for the
development of the awakening factors.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fifth vital condition for the
development of the awakening factors.'

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be ethical ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
live with energy roused up ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be wise ...

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should develop four
further things. They should develop the perception of ugliness to give
up greed, love to give up hate, mindfulness of breathing to cut off
thinking, and perception of impermanence to uproot the conceit 'I am'.
When you perceive impermanence, the perception of not-self becomes
stabilized. Perceiving not-self, you uproot the conceit 'I am' and
attain extinguishment in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.2 Supported  *Nissayasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of being 'supported'. How is a mendicant who is
supported defined?"

"Mendicant, if a mendicant supported by faith gives up the unskillful
and develops the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them.

If a mendicant supported by conscience ...

If a mendicant supported by prudence ...

If a mendicant supported by energy ...

If a mendicant supported by wisdom gives up the unskillful and develops
the skillful, the unskillful is actually given up by them. What's been
given up is completely given up when it has been given up by seeing with
noble wisdom.

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should rely on four
things. What four? After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things,
endures some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.
That's how a mendicant is supported."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.3 With Meghiya  *Meghiyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Cālikā, on the
Cālikā mountain.

Now, at that time Venerable Meghiya was the Buddha's attendant. Then
Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, I'd like to enter Jantu village for alms."

"Please, Meghiya, go at your convenience."

Then Meghiya robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Jantu village for alms. After the meal, on his return from
almsround in Jantu village, he went to the shore of
Kimikālā river. As he was going for a walk along the shore
of the river he saw a lovely and delightful mango grove.

It occurred to him, "Oh, this mango grove is lovely and delightful! This
is good enough for striving for a gentleman wanting to strive. If the
Buddha allows me, I'll come back to this mango grove to meditate."

Then Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened, adding, "If the Buddha allows me,
I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"We're alone, Meghiya. Wait until another mendicant comes."

For a second time Meghiya said to the Buddha, "Sir, the Buddha has
nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. But I have. If
you allow me, I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"We're alone, Meghiya. Wait until another mendicant comes."

For a third time Meghiya said to the Buddha, "Sir, the Buddha has
nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. But I have. If
you allow me, I'll go back to that mango grove to meditate."

"Meghiya, since you speak of striving in meditation, what can I say?
Please, Meghiya, go at your convenience."

Then Meghiya got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went to that mango grove, and,
having plunged deep into it, sat at the root of a certain tree for the
day's meditation. But while Meghiya was meditating in that mango grove
he was beset mostly by three kinds of bad, unskillful thoughts, namely,
sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts.

Then he thought, "Oh, how incredible, how amazing! I've gone forth out
of faith from the lay life to homelessness, but I'm still harassed by
these three kinds of bad, unskillful thoughts: sensual, malicious, and
cruel thoughts."

Then Venerable Meghiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Meghiya, when the heart's release is not ripe, five things help it
ripen. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates. This
is the first thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when they want, without trouble or
difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment,
seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom,
freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. This is the third
thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This is the fifth thing that, when the heart's
release is not ripe, helps it ripen.

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be ethical ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the heart ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be energetic ...

A mendicant with good friends, companions, and associates can expect to
be wise ...

But then, a mendicant grounded on these five things should develop four
further things. They should develop the perception of ugliness to give
up greed, love to give up hate, mindfulness of breathing to cut off
thinking, and perception of impermanence to uproot the conceit 'I am'.
When you perceive impermanence, the perception of not-self becomes
stabilized. Perceiving not-self, you uproot the conceit 'I am' and
attain extinguishment in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.4 With Nandaka  *Nandakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was educating, encouraging, firing
up, and inspiring the mendicants in the assembly hall with a Dhamma
talk. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and
went to the assembly hall. He stood outside the door waiting for the
talk to end. When he knew the talk had ended he cleared his throat and
knocked on the door-panel. The mendicants opened the door for the
Buddha, and he entered the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat
spread out.

He said to Nandaka, "Nandaka, that was a long exposition of the teaching
you gave to the mendicants. My back was aching while I stood outside the
door waiting for the talk to end."

When he said this, Nandaka felt embarrassed and said to the Buddha,
"Sir, we didn't know that the Buddha was standing outside the door. If
we'd known, I wouldn't have said so much."

Then the Buddha, knowing that Nandaka was embarrassed, said to him,
"Good, good, Nandaka! It's appropriate for gentlemen like you, who have
gone forth out of faith from the lay life to homelessness, to sit
together for a Dhamma talk. When you're sitting together you should do
one of two things: discuss the teachings or keep noble silence.

Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're incomplete
in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking, 'How can I become
faithful and ethical?' When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're
complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity
of heart. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it,
thinking, 'How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal
serenity of heart?' When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets
internal serenity of heart, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart,
but they don't get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. So
they're incomplete in that respect. Suppose, Nandaka, there was a
four-footed animal that was lame and disabled. It would be incomplete in
that respect. In the same way, a mendicant is faithful, ethical, and
gets internal serenity of heart, but they don't get the higher wisdom of
discernment of principles. So they're incomplete in that respect, and
should fulfill it, thinking, 'How can I become faithful and ethical and
get internal serenity of heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment
of principles?'

When a mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of
heart and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, they're
complete in that respect."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Nandaka said to the
mendicants, "Just now, reverends, the Buddha explained a spiritual
practice that's entirely full and pure in four statements, before
getting up from his seat and entering his dwelling:

'Nandaka, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're incomplete
in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking, "How can I become
faithful and ethical?" When a mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're
complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but does not get internal serenity
of heart. ...

They get internal serenity of heart, but they don't get the higher
wisdom of discernment of principles. So they're incomplete in that
respect. Suppose, Nandaka, there was a four-footed animal that was lame
and disabled. It would be incomplete in that respect. In the same way, a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, and gets internal serenity of heart, but
they don't get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles. So
they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking:
"How can I become faithful and ethical and get internal serenity of
heart and get the higher wisdom of discernment of principles?" When a
mendicant is faithful and ethical and gets internal serenity of heart
and gets the higher wisdom of discernment of principles, they're
complete in that respect.'

Reverends, there are these five benefits of listening to the teachings
at the right time and discussing the teachings at the right time. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant proclaims a teaching to the mendicants that is good
in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful
and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure. Whenever they do this, they become liked and approved by
the Teacher, respected and admired. This is the first benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, they feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that
Dhamma. This is the second benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, they see the meaning of a deep saying in that Dhamma with
penetrating wisdom. This is the third benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, their spiritual companions esteem them more highly,
thinking, 'For sure this venerable has attained or will attain.' This is
the fourth benefit ...

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches the mendicants the Dhamma ... Whenever
they do this, there may be trainee mendicants present, who haven't
achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. Hearing that teaching, they rouse energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. There may be perfected mendicants present, who have ended
the defilements, completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the
fetter of continued existence, and are rightly freed through
enlightenment. Hearing that teaching, they simply live happily in this
life. This is the fifth benefit ...

These are the five benefits of listening to the teachings at the right
time and discussing the teachings at the right time."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.5 Powers  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness.

And what is the power of wisdom? One has clearly seen and clearly
contemplated with wisdom those qualities that are skillful and
considered to be skillful; those that are unskillful ... blameworthy ...
blameless ... dark ... bright ... to be cultivated ... not to be
cultivated ... not worthy of the noble ones ... worthy of the noble ones
and considered to be worthy of the noble ones. This is called the power
of wisdom.

And what is the power of energy? One generates enthusiasm, tries, makes
an effort, exerts the mind, and strives to give up those qualities that
are unskillful and considered to be unskillful; those that are
blameworthy ... dark ... not to be cultivated ... not worthy of the
noble ones and considered to be not worthy of the noble ones. One
generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and
strives to gain those qualities that are skillful and considered to be
skillful; those that are blameless ... bright ... to be cultivated ...
worthy of the noble ones and considered to be worthy of the noble ones.
This is called the power of energy.

And what is the power of blamelessness? It's when a noble disciple has
blameless conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. This is called the
power of blamelessness.

And what is the power of inclusiveness? There are these four ways of
being inclusive. Giving, kindly words, taking care, and equality. The
best of gifts is the gift of the teaching. The best sort of kindly
speech is to teach the Dhamma again and again to someone who is engaged
and who actively listens. The best way of taking care is to encourage,
settle, and ground the unfaithful in faith, the unethical in ethics, the
stingy in generosity, and the ignorant in wisdom. The best kind of
equality is the equality of a stream-enterer with another
stream-enterer, a once-returner with another once-returner, a
non-returner with another non-returner, and a perfected one with another
perfected one. This is called the power of inclusiveness. These are the
four powers.

A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past five fears. What
five? Fear regarding livelihood, disrepute, feeling insecure in an
assembly, death, and bad rebirth.

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'I have no fear regarding livelihood.
Why would I be afraid of that? I have these four powers: the powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. A witless person might
fear for their livelihood. A lazy person might fear for their
livelihood. A person who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech,
and mind might fear for their livelihood. A person who does not include
others might fear for their livelihood. I have no fear of disrepute ...
I have no fear about feeling insecure in an assembly ... I have no fear
of death ... I have no fear of a bad rebirth. Why would I be afraid of
that? I have these four powers: the powers of wisdom, energy,
blamelessness, and inclusiveness. A witless person might be afraid of a
bad rebirth. A lazy person might be afraid of a bad rebirth. A person
who does blameworthy things by way of body, speech, and mind might be
afraid of a bad rebirth. A person who does not include others might be
afraid of a bad rebirth.'

A noble disciple who has these four powers has got past these five
fears."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.6 Association  *Sevanāsutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, you should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should
associate with, and those you shouldn't associate with. You should
distinguish two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and those you
shouldn't wear. You should distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which
you should eat, and that which you shouldn't eat. You should distinguish
two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent, and those you shouldn't
frequent. You should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you
should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent. You should
distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent, and those
you shouldn't frequent.

You should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should associate
with, and those you shouldn't associate with.' That's what I said, but
why did I say it? Well, should you know of a person: 'When I associate
with this person, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities
decline. And the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are hard
to come by. And the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from
the lay life to homelessness is not being fully developed.' In this case
you should leave that person at that very time of the day or night,
without asking. You shouldn't follow them.

Whereas, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this
person, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline. But
the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
However, the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the
lay life to homelessness is not being fully developed.' In this case you
should leave that person after reflecting, without asking. You shouldn't
follow them.

Well, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this person,
unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow. And the
necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are hard to come by.
But the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the lay
life to homelessness is being fully developed.' In this case you should
follow that person after appraisal. You shouldn't leave them.

Whereas, should you know of a person: 'When I associate with this
person, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow. And
the necessities of life that a renunciate requires---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
And the goal of the ascetic life for which I went forth from the lay
life to homelessness is being fully developed.' In this case you should
follow that person. You shouldn't leave them, even if they send you
away. 'You should distinguish two kinds of people: those you should
associate with, and those you shouldn't associate with.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Well, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this robe, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not wear
that kind of robe. Whereas, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this
robe, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You
should wear that kind of robe. 'You should distinguish two kinds of
robes: those you should wear, and those you shouldn't wear.' That's what
I said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which you should
eat, and that which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, but why did
I say it? Well, should you know of almsfood: 'When I eat this almsfood,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not eat that kind of almsfood. Whereas, should you know of almsfood:
'When I eat this almsfood, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should eat that kind of almsfood. 'You should
distinguish two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat, and that
which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of lodging. Whereas, should you know of a
lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of lodging.
'You should distinguish two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? Well, should you know of a village or town: 'When I
frequent this village or town, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful
qualities decline.' You should not frequent that kind of village or
town. Whereas, should you know of a village or town: 'When I frequent
this village or town, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of village or town. 'You
should distinguish two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'You should distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a country: 'When I frequent this country,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of country. Whereas, should you know of a
country: 'When I frequent this country, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of country.
'You should distinguish two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.7 With Sutavā the Wanderer  *Sutavāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then the wanderer Sutavā went up
to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the
Buddha:

"Sir, this one time the Buddha was staying right here in
Rājagaha, the Mountainfold. There I heard and learned this
in the presence of the Buddha: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment---can't transgress in five respects. A mendicant
with defilements ended can't deliberately take the life of a living
creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a
deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they did
as a lay person.' I trust I properly heard, learned, applied the mind,
and remembered that from the Buddha?"

"Indeed, Sutavā, you properly heard, learned, applied the
mind, and remembered that. In the past, as today, I say this: 'A
mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress
in nine respects. A mendicant with defilements ended can't deliberately
take the life of a living creature, take something with the intention to
steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own
enjoyment like they did as a lay person. And they can't make decisions
prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or cowardice.' In the
past, as today, I say this: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment---can't transgress in these nine respects.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.8 With the Wanderer Sajjha  *Sajjhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then the wanderer Sajjha went up to the Buddha,
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this one time the Buddha was staying right here in
Rājagaha, the Mountainfold. There I heard and learned this
in the presence of the Buddha: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with
defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual journey, done what
had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their own true goal,
utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is rightly freed
through enlightenment---can't transgress in five respects. A mendicant
with defilements ended can't deliberately take the life of a living
creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a
deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they did
as a lay person.' I trust I properly heard, learned, applied the mind,
and remembered that from the Buddha?"

"Indeed, Sajjha, you properly heard, learned, applied the mind, and
remembered that. In the past, as today, I say this: 'A mendicant who is
perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is
rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress in nine respects.
A mendicant with defilements ended can't deliberately kill a living
creature, take something with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a
deliberate lie, or store up goods for their own enjoyment like they used
to as a lay person. And they can't abandon the Buddha, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, or the training.' In the past, as today, I say
this: 'A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't
transgress in these nine respects.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.9 Persons  *Puggalasutta*

"Mendicants, these nine people are found in the world. What nine? The
perfected one and the one practicing for perfection. The non-returner
and the one practicing to realize the fruit of non-return. The
once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of stream-entry. And the ordinary person. These are the nine
people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.10 Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods  *Āhuneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, these nine people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What nine? The perfected one and the one practicing for
perfection. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit
of non-return. The once-returner and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of once-return. The stream-enterer and the one practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. And a lamb of the flock. These are
the nine people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

