# The Chapter on Similarity

### AN 9.42 Cramped  *Sambādhasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then Venerable Udāyī went up to
Venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings
and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to
Ānanda, "Reverend, this was said by the god Pañcālacaṇḍa:

> 'The opening amid confinement\
> was discovered by the Buddha of vast intelligence,\
> who woke up to absorption,\
> the sage, the solitary bull.'

But what is confinement, and what is the opening amid confinement that
the Buddha spoke of?"

"Reverend, these five kinds of sensual stimulation are called
'confinement' by the Buddha. What five? Sights known by the eye that are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are the five kinds of
sensual stimulation that are called 'confinement' by the Buddha.

Now, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever placing of the mind and
keeping it connected has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second
absorption. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an opening amid
confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined. Confined by
what? Whatever rapture has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture ...
enters and remains in the third absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of creating an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But
it is still confined. Confined by what? Whatever bliss with equanimity
has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain ...
enters and remains in the fourth absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of form has not
ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is
still confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension
of infinite space has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
an opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still
confined. Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension of
infinite consciousness has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an
opening amid confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined.
Confined by what? Whatever perception of the dimension of nothingness
has not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an opening amid
confinement in a qualified sense. But it is still confined. Confined by
what? Whatever perception of neither perception nor non-perception has
not ceased is the confinement there.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of an
opening amid confinement in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.43 A Direct Witness  *Kāyasakkhīsutta*

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'direct witness'. What is the
direct witness that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. They meditate
directly experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the
Buddha spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the direct witness in a qualified sense. Furthermore, take a
mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of infinite
consciousness ... the dimension of nothingness ... the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. They meditate directly experiencing that
dimension in every way. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the direct
witness in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.44 Freed by Wisdom  *Paññāvimuttasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'freed by wisdom'. What is the
one freed by wisdom that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. And they understand that
with wisdom. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed by wisdom
in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. And they understand that with wisdom. To
this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed by wisdom in a definitive
sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.45 Freed Both Ways  *Ubhatobhāgavimuttasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of a person called 'freed both ways'. What is the
one freed both ways that the Buddha spoke of?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. They meditate directly
experiencing that dimension in every way. And they understand that with
wisdom. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed both ways in a
qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. They meditate directly experiencing that
dimension in every way. And they understand that with wisdom. To this
extent the Buddha spoke of the one freed both ways in a definitive
sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.46 In the Present Life  *Sandiṭṭhikadhammasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'. In
what way did the Buddha speak of a teaching apparent in the present
life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of the teaching apparent in the present life in a qualified sense.
...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of the
teaching apparent in the present life in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.47 Extinguishment Is Apparent in the Present Life  *Sandiṭṭhikanibbānasutta*

"Reverend, they say that 'extinguishment is apparent in the present
life'. In what way did the Buddha say extinguishment is apparent in the
present life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
said that extinguishment is apparent in the present life in a qualified
sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha said that
extinguishment is apparent in the present life in a definitive sense."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.48 Extinguishment  *Nibbānasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.49 Full Extinguishment  *Parinibbānasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'full extinguishment'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.50 Extinguishment in a Certain Respect  *Tadaṅganibbānasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment in a certain respect'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.51 Extinguishment in This Life  *Diṭṭhadhammanibbānasutta*

"Reverend, they speak of 'extinguishment in this life'. In what way did
the Buddha speak of extinguishment in this life?"

"First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. To this extent the Buddha
spoke of extinguishment in this life in a qualified sense. ...

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. To this extent the Buddha spoke of
extinguishment in this life in a definitive sense."


