# The Great Chapter

### AN 9.32 Progressive Meditations  *Anupubbavihārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these nine progressive meditations. What nine?
The first absorption, the second absorption, the third absorption, the
fourth absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, and the cessation of perception
and feeling. These are the nine progressive meditations."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.33 The Nine Progressive Meditative Attainments  *Anupubbavihārasamāpattisutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the nine progressive meditative
attainments ... And what are the nine progressive meditative
attainments?

Where sensual pleasures cease, and those who have thoroughly ended
sensual pleasures meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where sensual pleasures
cease', they should be told: 'Reverend, it's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. That's where sensual pleasures cease.' Clearly someone who is
not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the placing of the mind and keeping it connected cease, and those
who have thoroughly ended the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless,
quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone
should say, 'I do not know or see where the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected cease', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's where the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected cease.' Clearly someone who
is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where rapture ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended rapture
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where rapture ceases', they should be told: 'It's
when a mendicant, with the fading away of rapture, enters and remains in
the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and
aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss". That's where
rapture ceases.' Clearly someone who is not devious or deceitful would
approve and agree with that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and bowing
down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where bliss with equanimity ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended
bliss with equanimity meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where bliss with equanimity
ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, giving up pleasure
and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. That's where bliss with equanimity ceases.' Clearly
someone who is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with
that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage
with joined palms.

Where perceptions of form ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended
perceptions of form meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where perceptions of form
ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, going totally
beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that "space
is infinite", enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space.
That's where perceptions of form cease.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of infinite space ceases, and
those who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of
infinite space meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where the perception of the
dimension of infinite space ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that "consciousness is infinite", enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. That's where the perception of the dimension of
infinite space ceases.' Clearly someone who is not devious or deceitful
would approve and agree with that statement. They'd say 'Good!' and
bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness ceases,
and those who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of
infinite consciousness meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are
desireless, quenched, crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If
someone should say, 'I do not know or see where the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness ceases', they should be told: 'It's
when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. That's where the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness ceases.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of nothingness ceases, and those
who have thoroughly ended the perception of the dimension of nothingness
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where the perception of the dimension of
nothingness ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a mendicant, going
totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, enters and remains in the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. That's where the
perception of the dimension of nothingness ceases.' Clearly someone who
is not devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement.
They'd say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

Where the perception of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception ceases, and those who have thoroughly ended the
perception of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
meditate, I say: 'Clearly those venerables are desireless, quenched,
crossed over, and gone beyond in that respect.' If someone should say,
'I do not know or see where the perception of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception ceases', they should be told: 'It's when a
mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, enters and remains in the cessation of perception and
feeling. That's where the perception of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception ceases.' Clearly someone who is not
devious or deceitful would approve and agree with that statement. They'd
say 'Good!' and bowing down, they'd pay homage with joined palms.

These are the nine progressive meditative attainments."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.34 Extinguishment is Bliss  *Nibbānasukhasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

There he addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, extinguishment is bliss!
Extinguishment is bliss!"

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "But
Reverend Sāriputta, what's blissful about it, since nothing
is felt?"

"The fact that nothing is felt is precisely what's blissful about it.

Reverend, there are these five kinds of sensual stimulation. What five?
Sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by the ear ... Smells
known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ... Touches known by
the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are the five kinds of sensual stimulation. The
pleasure and happiness that arise from these five kinds of sensual
stimulation is called sensual pleasure.

First, take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ...
enters and remains in the first absorption. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
sensual pleasures beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a
happy person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for
them. In the same way, should perception and focus accompanied by
sensual pleasures beset them, that's an affliction for them. And
affliction has been called suffering by the Buddha. That's the way to
understand how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if
perception and focus accompanied by placing of the mind beset them,
that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, should
perception and focus accompanied by placing of the mind beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, with the fading away of rapture,
enters and remains in the third absorption. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
rapture beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy
person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In
the same way, should perception and focus accompanied by rapture beset
them, that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called
suffering by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how
extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth
absorption. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation, if
perception and focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset them,
that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, should
perception and focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by
form beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person
were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the
same way, should perception and focus accompanied by form beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. While a mendicant is
practicing such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by the
dimension of infinite space beset them, that's an affliction for them.
Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, should perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite space beset them, that's an
affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering by the
Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and
remains in the dimension of nothingness. While a mendicant is practicing
such a meditation, if perception and focus accompanied by the dimension
of infinite consciousness beset them, that's an affliction for them.
Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, should perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite consciousness beset them,
that's an affliction for them. And affliction has been called suffering
by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is
bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. While a mendicant is practicing such a meditation,
if perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of nothingness
beset them, that's an affliction for them. Suppose a happy person were
to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same
way, should perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of
nothingness beset them, that's an affliction for them. And affliction
has been called suffering by the Buddha. That too is a way to understand
how extinguishment is bliss.

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end.

That too is a way to understand how extinguishment is bliss."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.35 The Simile of the Cow  *Gāvīupamāsutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there was a mountain cow who was foolish,
incompetent, unskillful, and lacked common sense when roaming on rugged
mountains. She might think, 'Why don't I go somewhere I've never been
before? I could eat grass and drink water that I've never tried before.'
She'd take a step with a fore-hoof; but before it was properly set down,
she'd lift up a hind-hoof. She wouldn't go somewhere she'd never been
before, or eat grass and drink water that she'd never tried before. And
she'd never return safely to the place she had started from. Why is
that? Because that mountain cow was foolish, incompetent, unskillful,
and lacked common sense when roaming on rugged mountains.

In the same way, some foolish, incompetent, unskillful mendicant,
lacking common sense, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. But they don't cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis; they don't ensure it is properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enter and remain in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' But
they're not able to enter and remain in the second absorption. They
think, 'Why don't I, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected.' But they're not able to enter and remain
in the first absorption. This is called a mendicant who has slipped and
fallen from both sides. They're like the mountain cow who was foolish,
incompetent, unskillful, and lacking in common sense when roaming on
rugged mountains.

Suppose there was a mountain cow who was astute, competent, skillful,
and used common sense when roaming on rugged mountains. She might think,
'Why don't I go somewhere I've never been before? I could eat grass and
drink water that I've never tried before.' She'd take a step with a
fore-hoof; and after it was properly set down, she'd lift up a
hind-hoof. She'd go somewhere she'd never been before, and eat grass and
drink water that she'd never tried before. And she'd return safely to
the place she had started from. Why is that? Because that mountain cow
was astute, competent, skillful, and used common sense when roaming on
rugged mountains. In the same way, some astute, competent, skillful
mendicant, using common sense, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. They cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, enter and remain in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected.' Without
charging at the second absorption, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second
absorption. They cultivate, develop, and make much of that basis,
ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, with the fading away of rapture, enter and
remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss."' Without
charging at the third absorption, with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption. They cultivate, develop, and
make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, with the giving up of pleasure and pain, and
the ending of former happiness and sadness, enter and remain in the
fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness.' Without charging at the fourth absorption, with the giving
up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness,
they enter and remain in the fourth absorption. They cultivate, develop,
and make much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that "space is infinite", enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite space.' Without charging at the dimension of
infinite space, with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain
in the dimension of infinite space. They cultivate, develop, and make
much of that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", enter and remain in the
dimension of infinite consciousness.' Without charging at the dimension
of infinite consciousness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. They cultivate, develop, and make much of that
basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enter and remain in
the dimension of nothingness.' Without charging at the dimension of
nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. They
cultivate, develop, and make much of that basis, ensuring that it's
properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.' Without charging at the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. They cultivate, develop, and make much of
that basis, ensuring that it's properly stabilized.

They think, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, enter and remain in the cessation of
perception and feeling.' Without charging at the cessation of perception
and feeling, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling.

When a mendicant enters and emerges from all these attainments, their
mind becomes pliable and workable. With a pliable and workable mind,
their immersion becomes limitless and well developed. They extend the
mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by
insight; and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and
every one is within range.

They might wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying myself and becoming one again ... controlling my body as far
as the realm of divinity.' They are capable of realizing it, since each
and every one is within range.

They might wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
may I hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.' They are capable of realizing it, since each and every one is
within range.

They might wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
... scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that
is not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' They are capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

They might wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' They're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

They might wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may
I see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.'
They're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

They might wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' They're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.36 Depending on Absorption  *Jhānasutta*

"Mendicants, I say that the first absorption is a basis for ending the
defilements. The second absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The third absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The fourth absorption is also a basis for ending the
defilements. The dimension of infinite space is also a basis for ending
the defilements. The dimension of infinite consciousness is also a basis
for ending the defilements. The dimension of nothingness is also a basis
for ending the defilements. The dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception is also a basis for ending the defilements. The cessation
of perception and feeling is also a basis for ending the defilements.

'The first absorption is a basis for ending the defilements.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who, quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as
a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as
empty, as not-self. They turn their mind away from those things, and
apply it to freedom from death: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements.
If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the
five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their
passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and
are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way a noble
disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, enters and remains in
the first absorption. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent,
as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn
their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death:
'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all
activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving,
fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. 'The
first absorption is a basis for ending the defilements.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'The second absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The third absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The fourth absorption is also a basis for ending the defilements.' ...

'The dimension of infinite space is also a basis for ending the
defilements.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of
perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite space. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as
suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn
their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death:
'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all
activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving,
fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way, take a
mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of infinite space. ...
'The dimension of infinite space is a basis for ending the defilements.'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'The dimension of infinite consciousness is a basis for ending the
defilements.' ...

'The dimension of nothingness is a basis for ending the defilements.'
That's what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who, going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', enters and remains in the dimension of
nothingness. They contemplate the phenomena there---included in feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness---as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. They turn their mind
away from those things, and apply it to freedom from death: 'This is
peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the
letting go of all attachments, the ending of craving, fading away,
cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of
defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because
of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world.

It's like an archer or their apprentice who first practices on a straw
man or a clay model. At a later time they become a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, who shatters large objects. In the same way, take a
mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They contemplate the phenomena
there---included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness---as
impermanent, as suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery,
as an affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self.
They turn their mind away from those things, and apply it to freedom
from death: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the stilling
of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' Abiding in that they
attain the ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of
defilements, with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn
spontaneously, because of their passion and love for that meditation.
They are extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that
world. 'The dimension of nothingness is a basis for ending the
defilements.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

And so, mendicants, penetration to enlightenment extends as far as
attainments with perception. But the two dimensions that depend on
these---the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and the
cessation of perception and feeling---are properly explained by
mendicants who are skilled in these attainments and skilled in emerging
from them, after they've entered them and emerged from them."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.37 By Ānanda  *Ānandasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. There Ānanda addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found
an opening amid confinement. It's in order to purify sentient beings, to
get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to
discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

The eye itself is actually present, and so are those sights. Yet one
will not experience that sense-field. The ear itself is actually
present, and so are those sounds. Yet one will not experience that
sense-field. The nose itself is actually present, and so are those
smells. Yet one will not experience that sense-field. The tongue itself
is actually present, and so are those tastes. Yet one will not
experience that sense-field. The body itself is actually present, and so
are those touches. Yet one will not experience that sense-field."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to Venerable
Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, is one who doesn't experience that sense-field
actually percipient or not?"

"Reverend, one who doesn't experience that sense-field is actually
percipient, not non-percipient."

"But what does one who doesn't experience that sense-field perceive?"

"It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. One who doesn't experience that sense-field
perceives in this way.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. One who doesn't experience that
sense-field perceives in this way.

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. One who doesn't experience that
sense-field perceives in this way.

Reverend, this one time I was staying near Sāketa in the
deer park in Añjana Wood. Then the nun
Jaṭilagāhikā came up to me, bowed, stood to one side, and
said to me: 'Honorable Ānanda, regarding the immersion that does not
lean forward or pull back, and is not held in place by forceful
suppression. Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being
content, one is not anxious. What did the Buddha say was the fruit of
this immersion?'

When she said this, I said to her: 'Sister, regarding the immersion that
does not lean forward or pull back, and is not held in place by forceful
suppression. Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being
content, one is not anxious. The Buddha said that the fruit of this
immersion is enlightenment.' One who doesn't experience that sense-field
perceives in this way, too."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.38 Brahmin Cosmologists  *Lokāyatikasutta*

Then two brahmin cosmologists went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, they sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, Pūraṇa Kassapa claims to be all-knowing and
all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:
'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me,
while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' He says: 'With infinite
knowledge I know and see that the cosmos is infinite.' And the Jain
ascetic of the Ñātika clan also claims to be all-knowing
and all-seeing, to know and see everything without exception, thus:
'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually present to me,
while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' He says: 'With infinite
knowledge I know and see that the cosmos is finite.' These two claim to
speak from knowledge, but they directly contradict each other. Which one
of them speaks the truth, and which falsehood?"

"Enough, brahmins, let that be. I will teach you the Dhamma. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," those brahmins replied. The Buddha said this:

"Suppose there were four men standing in the four quarters. Each of them
was extremely fast, with an extremely mighty stride. They're as fast as
a light arrow easily shot across the shadow of a palm tree by a
well-trained expert archer with a strong bow. Their stride was such that
it spanned from the eastern ocean to the western ocean. Then the man
standing in the east would say: 'I will reach the end of the world by
traveling.' Though he'd travel for his whole lifespan of a hundred
years---pausing only to eat and drink, go to the toilet, and sleep to
dispel weariness---he'd die along the way, never reaching the end of the
world. Then the man standing in the west ... Then the man standing in
the north ... Then the man standing in the south would say: 'I will
reach the end of the world by traveling.' Though he'd travel for his
whole lifespan of a hundred years---pausing only to eat and drink, go to
the toilet, and sleep to dispel weariness---he'd die along the way,
never reaching the end of the world. Why is that? I say it's not
possible to know or see or reach the end of the world by running like
this. But I also say there's no making an end of suffering without
reaching the end of the world.

These five kinds of sensual stimulation are called the world in the
training of the Noble One. What five? Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These five kinds of sensual
stimulation are called the world in the training of the Noble One.

Take a mendicant who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is called a mendicant who, having
gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the world. Others
say of them: 'They're included in the world, and haven't yet left the
world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in the world, and haven't
yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled, enters and remains in the second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called a
mendicant who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end
of the world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and
haven't yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in
the world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant
who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the
world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and haven't
yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in the
world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who enters and remains in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. ... the dimension of nothingness ... the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is called a
mendicant who, having gone to the end of the world, meditates at the end
of the world. Others say of them: 'They're included in the world, and
haven't yet left the world.' And I also say this: 'They're included in
the world, and haven't yet left the world.'

Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enters and remains in the
cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their
defilements come to an end. This is called a mendicant who, having gone
to the end of the world, meditates at the end of the world. And they've
crossed over clinging to the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.39 The War Between the Gods and the Titans  *Devāsurasaṅgāmasutta*

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a battle was fought between the gods and
the titans. In that battle the titans won and the gods lost. Defeated,
the gods fled north with the titans in pursuit.

Then the gods thought, 'The titans are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a second time?' And so a second battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a second time the titans won
and the gods lost. Defeated, the gods fled north with the titans in
pursuit.

Then the gods thought, 'The titans are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a third time?' And so a third battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a third time the titans won and
the gods lost. Defeated and terrified, the gods fled right into the
castle of the gods.

When they had entered their castle, they thought, 'Now we're in a secure
location and the titans can't do anything to us.' The titans also
thought, 'Now the gods are in a secure location and we can't do anything
to them.'

Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.
In that battle the gods won and the titans lost. Defeated, the titans
fled south with the gods in pursuit.

Then the titans thought, 'The gods are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a second time?' And so a second battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a second time the gods won and
the titans lost. Defeated, the titans fled south with the gods in
pursuit.

Then the titans thought, 'The gods are still in pursuit. Why don't we
engage them in battle a third time?' And so a third battle was fought
between the gods and the titans. And for a third time the gods won and
the titans lost. Defeated and terrified, the titans fled right into the
citadel of the titans.

When they had entered their citadel, they thought, 'Now we're in a
secure location and the gods can't do anything to us.' And the gods also
thought, 'Now the titans are in a secure location and we can't do
anything to them.'

In the same way, there's a time when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. At that time
the mendicant thinks, 'Now I'm in a secure location and
Māra can't do anything to me.' And Māra the
Wicked also thinks, 'Now the mendicant is in a secure location and we
can't do anything to them.'

There's a time when, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected
are stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. At that time the mendicant
thinks, 'Now I'm in a secure location and Māra can't do
anything to me.' And Māra the Wicked also thinks, 'Now the
mendicant is in a secure location and we can't do anything to them.'

There's a time when a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. This is called a mendicant
who has blinded Māra, put out his eyes without a trace, and
gone where the Wicked One cannot see.

There's a time when a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ... Going totally
beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is
nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness.
... Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and
remain in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. ...

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an end.
This is called a mendicant who has blinded Māra, put out
his eyes without a trace, and gone where the Wicked One cannot see. And
they've crossed over clinging to the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.40 The Simile of the Bull Elephant in the Forest  *Nāgasutta*

"Mendicants, when a wild bull elephant is engrossed in the pasture, but
other elephants---males, females, younglings, or cubs---got there first
and trampled the grass, the wild bull elephant is horrified, repelled,
and disgusted by that. When the wild bull elephant is engrossed in the
pasture, but other elephants---males, females, younglings, or cubs---eat
the broken branches that he has dragged down, the wild bull elephant is
horrified, repelled, and disgusted by that. When a wild bull elephant
has plunged into the pool, but other elephants---males, females,
younglings, or cubs---got there first and stirred up the water with
their trunks, the wild bull elephant is horrified, repelled, and
disgusted by that. When a wild bull elephant has come out of the pool
and the female elephants bump into him, the wild bull elephant is
horrified, repelled, and disgusted by that.

At that time the wild bull elephant thinks: 'These days I live crowded
by other males, females, younglings, and cubs. I eat the grass they've
trampled, and they eat the broken branches I've dragged down. I drink
muddy water, and after my bath the female elephants bump into me. Why
don't I live alone, withdrawn from the herd?' After some time he lives
alone, withdrawn from the herd, and he eats untrampled grass, and other
elephants don't eat the broken branches he has dragged down. He doesn't
drink muddy water, and the female elephants don't bump into him after
his bath.

At that time the wild bull elephant thinks: 'Formerly I lived crowded by
other males, females, younglings, and cubs. I ate the grass they'd
trampled, and they ate the broken branches I'd dragged down. I drank
muddy water, and after my bath the female elephants bumped into me. Now
I live alone, and I'm free of all these things.' He breaks off a branch
and scratches his body, happily relieving his itches.

In the same way, when a mendicant lives crowded by monks, nuns, laymen,
and laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and by monastics of
other religions and their disciples, they think: 'These days I live
crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers and their chief
ministers, and monastics of other religions and their disciples. Why
don't I live alone, withdrawn from the group?' They frequent a secluded
lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain
cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. Gone to
a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, they sit
down cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind free of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt. They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the
heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. They happily relieve their
itches. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled,
they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ...
fourth absorption. They happily relieve their itches.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. They happily relieve their itches. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. ...
Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. ... Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. ... Furthermore, take a mendicant who, going totally
beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters
and remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. And, having seen
with wisdom, their defilements come to an end. They happily relieve
their itches."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.41 With the Householder Tapussa  *Tapussasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Mallas, near the
Mallian town named Uruvelakappa.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Uruvelakappa for alms. Then, after the meal, on his return from
almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda, you stay right here,
while I plunge deep into the Great Wood for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. Then the Buddha plunged deep into the Great
Wood and sat at the root of a tree for the day's meditation.

The householder Tapussa went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Honorable Ānanda, we are laypeople who enjoy sensual pleasures. We like
sensual pleasures, we love them and take joy in them. But renunciation
seems like an abyss. I have heard that in this teaching and training
there are very young mendicants whose minds leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in renunciation. They see it as
peaceful. Renunciation is the dividing line between the multitude and
the mendicants in this teaching and training."

"Householder, we should see the Buddha about this matter. Come, let's go
to the Buddha and inform him about this. As he answers, so we'll
remember it."

"Yes, sir," replied Tapussa. Then Ānanda together with Tapussa went to
the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Ānanda told him what had
happened.

"That's so true, Ānanda! That's so true! Before my awakening---when I
was still unawakened but intent on awakening---I too thought,
'Renunciation is good! Seclusion is good!' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in renunciation.
I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the cause, what is
the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in renunciation? Why don't I see it as
peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of sensual
pleasures, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the
benefits of renunciation, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in renunciation. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then
I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of sensual pleasures, I
were to cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of
renunciation, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in
renunciation. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time,
I saw the drawbacks of sensual pleasures and cultivated that, and I
realized the benefits of renunciation and developed that. Then my mind
leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in
renunciation. I saw it as peaceful. And so, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, I entered and remained in
the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. While I was in that
meditation, perception and focus accompanied by sensual pleasures beset
me, and that was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to
experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way,
when perception and focus accompanied by sensual pleasures beset me,
that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled ... enter and remain in the second absorption?'
But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in not placing the mind. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I
thought, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not
placing the mind? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I
haven't seen the drawbacks of placing the mind, and so I haven't
cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of not placing the
mind, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not placing
the mind. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of placing the mind, I were to
cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of not placing
the mind, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in not placing
the mind. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I
saw the drawbacks of placing the mind and cultivated that, and I
realized the benefits of not placing the mind and developed that. Then
my mind did leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided
in not placing the mind. I saw it as peaceful. And so, as the placing of
the mind and keeping it connected were stilled ... I entered and
remained in the second absorption. While I was in that meditation,
perception and focus accompanied by placing the mind beset me, and that
was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when
perception and focus accompanied by placing the mind and keeping it
connected beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, with the fading away of rapture, enter and
remain in the third absorption, where I will meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss"?' But my
mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in freedom from rapture. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I
thought, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not
leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in freedom
from rapture? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I
haven't seen the drawbacks of rapture, and so I haven't cultivated that.
I haven't realized the benefits of freedom from rapture, and so I
haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in freedom from rapture. And
it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that,
seeing the drawbacks of rapture, I were to cultivate that. And suppose
that, realizing the benefits of freedom from rapture, I were to develop
that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in being free from rapture. And I would
see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I saw the drawbacks of
rapture and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of freedom from
rapture and developed that. Then my mind leapt forth, gained confidence,
settled down, and became decided in freedom from rapture. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, with the fading away of rapture ... I entered and
remained in the third absorption. While I was in that meditation,
perception and focus accompanied by rapture beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by rapture beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, with the giving up of pleasure and pain,
and the ending of former happiness and sadness, enter and remain in the
fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. I didn't
see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the cause, what is the
reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down,
and become decided in being without pleasure and pain? Why don't I see
it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of bliss
with equanimity, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized
the benefits of being without pleasure and pain, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. And
it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that,
seeing the drawbacks of bliss with equanimity, I were to cultivate that.
And suppose that, realizing the benefits of being without pleasure and
pain, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in being without
pleasure and pain. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some
time, I saw the drawbacks of bliss with equanimity and cultivated that,
and I realized the benefits of being without pleasure and pain and
developed that. Then my mind did leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in being without pleasure and pain. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, giving up pleasure and pain ... I entered and remained
in the fourth absorption. While I was in that meditation, perception and
focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by bliss with equanimity beset me, that was an
affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond perceptions of form,
with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite", enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite space?' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite space. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is
the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of infinite
space? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't seen
the drawbacks of forms, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't
realized the benefits of the dimension of infinite space, and so I
haven't developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of infinite
space. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of forms, I were to cultivate that.
And suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of infinite
space, I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite space. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some
time, I saw the drawbacks of forms and cultivated that, and I realized
the benefits of the dimension of infinite space and developed that. Then
my mind leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided
in the dimension of infinite space. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', I entered and remained in the dimension of infinite space.
While I was in that meditation, perception and focus accompanied by
forms beset me, and that was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy
person were to experience pain; that would be an affliction for them. In
the same way, when perception and focus accompanied by forms beset me,
that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space, aware that "consciousness is infinite", enter and remain
in the dimension of infinite consciousness?' But my mind did not leap
forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension
of infinite consciousness. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought,
'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
infinite consciousness? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought,
'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite space, and so
I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of infinite consciousness, and so I haven't developed that.
That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down,
and become decided in the dimension of infinite consciousness. And it's
why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing
the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite space, I were to cultivate
that. And suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of
infinite consciousness, I were to develop that. It's possible that my
mind would leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided
in the dimension of infinite consciousness. And I would see it as
peaceful.' And so, after some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension
of infinite space and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of
the dimension of infinite consciousness and developed that. Then my mind
leapt forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', I entered and remained in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. While I was in that meditation, perception and
focus accompanied by the dimension of infinite space beset me, and that
was an affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience
pain; that would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when
perception and focus accompanied by the dimension of infinite space
beset me, that was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that "there is nothing at all", enter and
remain in the dimension of nothingness?' But my mind did not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is the
cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought, 'I haven't
seen the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite consciousness, and so I
haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of nothingness, and so I haven't developed that. That's why my
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided in the dimension of nothingness. And it's why I don't see it as
peaceful.' Then I thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the
dimension of infinite consciousness, I were to cultivate that. And
suppose that, realizing the benefits of the dimension of nothingness, I
were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of
nothingness. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after some time, I
saw the drawbacks of the dimension of infinite consciousness and
cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of the dimension of
nothingness and developed that. Then my mind leapt forth, gained
confidence, settled down, and became decided in the dimension of
nothingness. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', I entered and remained in the dimension of nothingness. While I
was in that meditation, perception and focus accompanied by the
dimension of infinite consciousness beset me, and that was an affliction
for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that would be an
affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of infinite consciousness beset me, that
was an affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain confidence, settle
down, and become decided in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought, 'What is
the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I
thought, 'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of nothingness,
and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the benefits of the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I
thought, 'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the dimension of
nothingness, I were to cultivate that. And suppose that, realizing the
benefits of the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, I
were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so,
after some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension of nothingness and
cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception and developed that. Then my mind leapt
forth, gained confidence, settled down, and became decided in the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. I saw it as
peaceful. And so, going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, I
entered and remained in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. While I was in that meditation, perception and focus
accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me, and that was an
affliction for me. Suppose a happy person were to experience pain; that
would be an affliction for them. In the same way, when perception and
focus accompanied by the dimension of nothingness beset me, that was an
affliction for me.

Then I thought, 'Why don't I, going totally beyond the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, enter and remain in the cessation
of perception and feeling?' But my mind did not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling. I didn't see it as peaceful. Then I thought,
'What is the cause, what is the reason why my mind does not leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling? Why don't I see it as peaceful?' Then I thought,
'I haven't seen the drawbacks of the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, and so I haven't cultivated that. I haven't realized the
benefits of the cessation of perception and feeling, and so I haven't
developed that. That's why my mind does not leap forth, gain confidence,
settle down, and become decided in the cessation of perception and
feeling. And it's why I don't see it as peaceful.' Then I thought,
'Suppose that, seeing the drawbacks of the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception, I were to cultivate that. And suppose
that, realizing the benefits of the cessation of perception and feeling,
I were to develop that. It's possible that my mind would leap forth,
gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And I would see it as peaceful.' And so, after
some time, I saw the drawbacks of the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception and cultivated that, and I realized the benefits of
the cessation of perception and feeling and developed that. Then my mind
did leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become decided in the
cessation of perception and feeling. I saw it as peaceful. And so, going
totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, I
entered and remained in the cessation of perception and feeling. And,
having seen with wisdom, my defilements were ended.

As long as I hadn't entered into and withdrawn from these nine
progressive meditative attainments in both forward and reverse order, I
didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I had entered into and withdrawn from these nine progressive
meditative attainments in both forward and reverse order, I announced my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

