# The Chapter on Perceptions for Ascetics

### AN 10.101 Perceptions for Ascetics  *Samaṇasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when these three perceptions for ascetics are developed and
cultivated they fulfill seven things. What three? 'I have secured
freedom from class.' 'My livelihood is tied up with others.' 'My
behavior should be different.' When these three perceptions for ascetics
are developed and cultivated they fulfill seven things.

What seven? Their deeds and behavior are always consistent with the
precepts. They're content, kind-hearted, and humble. They want to train.
They use the necessities of life after reflecting on their purpose.
They're energetic. When those three perceptions for ascetics are
developed and cultivated they fulfill these seven things."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.102 Awakening Factors  *Bojjhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, when the seven awakening factors are developed and
cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. What seven? The awakening
factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity. When these seven awakening
factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill three knowledges. What
three? It's when a mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives.
That is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the
world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the
world contracting and expanding. They recollect their many kinds of past
lives, with features and details. With clairvoyance that is purified and
surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings are reborn
according to their deeds. They realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. When those
seven awakening factors are developed and cultivated they fulfill these
three knowledges."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.103 The Wrong Way  *Micchattasutta*

"Mendicants, relying on the wrong way leads to failure, not success. And
how does relying on the wrong way lead to failure, not success? Wrong
view gives rise to wrong thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong
speech. Wrong speech gives rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise
to wrong livelihood. Wrong livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong
effort gives rise to wrong mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to
wrong immersion. Wrong immersion gives rise to wrong knowledge. Wrong
knowledge gives rise to wrong freedom. That's how relying on the wrong
way leads to failure, not success.

Relying on the right way leads to success, not failure. And how does
relying on the right way lead to success, not failure? Right view gives
rise to right thought. Right thought gives rise to right speech. Right
speech gives rise to right action. Right action gives rise to right
livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to right effort. Right effort
gives rise to right mindfulness. Right mindfulness gives rise to right
immersion. Right immersion gives rise to right knowledge. Right
knowledge gives rise to right freedom. That's how relying on the right
way leads to success, not failure."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.104 A Seed  *Bījasutta*

"Mendicants, consider an individual who has wrong view, thought, speech,
action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion, knowledge, and
freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering.
Why is that? Because their view is bad.

Suppose a seed of neem, angled gourd, or bitter gourd was planted in
moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its bitter, acerbic, and unpleasant taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is bad. In the same way, consider an individual who has
wrong view, thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness,
immersion, knowledge, and freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental
deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims,
wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable,
disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. Why is that? Because their view is
bad.

Consider an individual who has right view, thought, speech, action,
livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion, knowledge, and freedom.
Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line with
that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is that?
Because their view is good.

Suppose a seed of sugar cane, fine rice, or grape was planted in moist
earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water would
lead to its sweet, pleasant, and delicious taste. Why is that? Because
the seed is fine. In the same way, consider a person who has right view,
thought, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, immersion,
knowledge, and freedom. Whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they
undertake in line with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and
choices all lead to what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial,
and pleasant. Why is that? Because their view is good."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.105 Knowledge  *Vijjāsutta*

"Mendicants, ignorance precedes the attainment of unskillful qualities,
with lack of conscience and prudence following along. An ignoramus, sunk
in ignorance, gives rise to wrong view. Wrong view gives rise to wrong
thought. Wrong thought gives rise to wrong speech. Wrong speech gives
rise to wrong action. Wrong action gives rise to wrong livelihood. Wrong
livelihood gives rise to wrong effort. Wrong effort gives rise to wrong
mindfulness. Wrong mindfulness gives rise to wrong immersion. Wrong
immersion gives rise to wrong knowledge. Wrong knowledge gives rise to
wrong freedom.

Knowledge precedes the attainment of skillful qualities, with conscience
and prudence following along. A sage, firm in knowledge, gives rise to
right view. Right view gives rise to right thought. Right thought gives
rise to right speech. Right speech gives rise to right action. Right
action gives rise to right livelihood. Right livelihood gives rise to
right effort. Right effort gives rise to right mindfulness. Right
mindfulness gives rise to right immersion. Right immersion gives rise to
right knowledge. Right knowledge gives rise to right freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.106 Wearing Away  *Nijjarasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these ten grounds for wearing away. What ten?

For one of right view, wrong view is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are worn away. And
because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong thought are worn away.
And because of right thought, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right speech, wrong speech is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong speech are worn away.
And because of right speech, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right action, wrong action is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong action are worn away.
And because of right action, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong livelihood are
worn away. And because of right livelihood, many skillful qualities are
fully developed.

For one of right effort, wrong effort is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong effort are worn away.
And because of right effort, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is worn away. And the
many bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong mindfulness
are worn away. And because of right mindfulness, many skillful qualities
are fully developed.

For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong immersion are worn
away. And because of right immersion, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is worn away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong knowledge are worn
away. And because of right knowledge, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is worn away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are worn away.
And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully
developed.

These are the ten grounds for wearing away."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.107 The Bone-Washing Ceremony  *Dhovanasutta*

"Mendicants, in the southern lands there is a ceremony named
'bone-washing'. There they have food, drink, snacks, meals,
refreshments, and beverages, as well as dancing, singing, and music.
There is such a washing, I don't deny it. But that washing is low,
crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

I will teach a noble washing that leads solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
Relying on that washing, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old
age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are
freed from all these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is that noble washing?

For one of right view, wrong view is washed away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong view are washed away.
And because of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is washed away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is washed away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is washed away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is washed away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
washed away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is
washed away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is washed
away. ... For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is washed away.
...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is washed away. And the many
bad, unskillful qualities that arise because of wrong freedom are washed
away. And because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully
developed. This is the noble washing that leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. Relying on this washing, sentient beings who are liable
to rebirth, old age, and death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are freed from all these things."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.108 Doctors  *Tikicchakasutta*

"Mendicants, doctors prescribe a purgative for eliminating illnesses
stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind. There is such a
purgative, I don't deny it. But this kind of purgative sometimes works
and sometimes fails.

I will teach a noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on that
purgative, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and
death, to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed
from all these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what is the noble purgative that works without fail?

For one of right view, wrong view is purged. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are purged. And because of
right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is purged. ... For one of right
speech, wrong speech is purged. ... For one of right action, wrong
action is purged. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong livelihood is
purged. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is purged. For one of
right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is purged. ... For one of right
immersion, wrong immersion is purged. ... For one of right knowledge,
wrong knowledge is purged. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is purged. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are purged. And because
of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed. This is
the noble purgative that works without fail. Relying on this purgative,
sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death, to
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.109 Emetic  *Vamanasutta*

"Mendicants, doctors prescribe an emetic for eliminating illnesses
stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, and wind. There is such an
emetic, I don't deny it. But this kind of emetic sometimes works and
sometimes fails.

I will teach a noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on that
emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death,
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. ...

And what is that noble emetic that works without fail?

For one of right view, wrong view is vomited up. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong view are vomited up. And because
of right view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is vomited up. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is vomited up. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is vomited up. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is vomited up. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
vomited up. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is
vomited up. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is vomited
up. ... For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is vomited up. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is vomited up. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are vomited up. And
because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.
This is the noble emetic that works without fail. Relying on this
emetic, sentient beings who are liable to rebirth, old age, and death,
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are freed from all
these things."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.110 Blown Away  *Niddhamanīyasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten qualities should be blown away. What ten? For one
of right view, wrong view is blown away. And the many bad, unskillful
qualities produced by wrong view are blown away. And because of right
view, many skillful qualities are fully developed.

For one of right thought, wrong thought is blown away. ... For one of
right speech, wrong speech is blown away. ... For one of right action,
wrong action is blown away. ... For one of right livelihood, wrong
livelihood is blown away. ... For one of right effort, wrong effort is
blown away. ... For one of right mindfulness, wrong mindfulness is blown
away. ... For one of right immersion, wrong immersion is blown away. ...
For one of right knowledge, wrong knowledge is blown away. ...

For one of right freedom, wrong freedom is blown away. And the many bad,
unskillful qualities produced by wrong freedom are blown away. And
because of right freedom, many skillful qualities are fully developed.
These are the ten qualities that should be blown away."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.111 An Adept (1st)  *Paṭhamaasekhasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this person called 'an adept'. How is an adept
mendicant defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a mendicant has an adept's right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
That's how a mendicant is an adept."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.112 An Adept (2nd)  *Dutiyaasekhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ten qualities of an adept. What ten? An adept's
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and
right freedom. These are the ten qualities of an adept."

