# The Chapter on the Body Born of Deeds

### AN 10.211 Heaven and Hell (1st)  *Paṭhamanirayasaggasutta*

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? It's when a
certain person kills living creatures. They're violent, bloody-handed, a
hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sexual relations with women who
have their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They have sexual relations with a woman
who is protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation
is punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

They lie. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family meeting,
a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness: 'Please,
mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I know.' Knowing,
they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I see.' And seeing, they
say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for the sake of themselves
or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They talk nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is neither factual nor
beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching or the training.
Their words have no value, and are untimely, unreasonable, rambling, and
pointless.

They're covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of others: 'Oh,
if only their belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.' Someone with these ten qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They don't, with the intention to commit theft,
take the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sex with women who have
their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sex with a woman who is
protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is
punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

They give up lying. They're summoned to a council, an assembly, a family
meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to bear witness:
'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say 'I don't
know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I don't see.'
And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they don't deliberately lie for the
sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They're content. They don't covet the wealth and belongings of others:
'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

Someone with these ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.212 Heaven and Hell (2nd)  *Dutiyanirayasaggasutta*

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? It's when a
certain person kills living creatures. They're violent, bloody-handed, a
hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. ... They commit sexual misconduct. ... They lie. ... They
speak divisively. ... They speak harshly. ... They indulge in talking
nonsense. ... They're covetous. ... They have cruel intentions. ... They
have wrong view. ... Someone with these ten qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. ... They give up sexual misconduct. ... They give
up lying. ... They give up divisive speech. ... They give up harsh
speech. ... They give up talking nonsense. ... They're content. ...
They're kind hearted. ... They have right view. ... Someone with these
ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.213 A Female  *Mātugāmasutta*

"A female with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? She kills
living creatures. ... She steals. ... She commits sexual misconduct. ...
She lies. ... She speaks divisively. ... She speaks harshly. ... She
indulges in talking nonsense. ... She's covetous. ... She has cruel
intentions. ... She has wrong view. ... A female with these ten
qualities is cast down to hell.

A female with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? She
doesn't kill living creatures. ... She doesn't steal. ... She doesn't
commit sexual misconduct. ... She doesn't lie. ... She doesn't speak
divisively. ... She doesn't speak harshly. ... She doesn't indulge in
talking nonsense. ... She's content. ... She's kind hearted. ... She has
right view. ... A female with these ten qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.214 A Laywoman  *Upāsikāsutta*

"A laywoman with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? She kills
living creatures. ... She has wrong view. ... A laywoman with these ten
qualities is cast down to hell.

A laywoman with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? She
doesn't kill living creatures. ... She has right view. ... A laywoman
with these ten qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.215 Assured  *Visāradasutta*

"A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured.
What ten? She kills living creatures. ... She has wrong view. ... A
laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is not self-assured.

A laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured. What
ten? She doesn't kill living creatures. ... She has right view. ... A
laywoman living at home with these ten qualities is self-assured."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.216 Creepy Creatures  *Saṁsappanīyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on creepy
creatures. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is the exposition of the teaching on creepy creatures? Sentient
beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are
their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be the heir of
whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.

Take a certain person who kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings. They're
creepy in body, speech, and mind. Doing crooked deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind, their destiny and rebirth are crooked.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is crooked is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in an exclusively painful hell, or among the species of
creepy animals. And what are the species of creepy animals? Snakes,
scorpions, centipedes, mongooses, cats, mice, owls, or whatever other
species of animal that creep away when they see humans. This is how a
being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and
when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient
beings are heirs to their deeds.

Take someone else who steals ... commits sexual misconduct ... lies ...
speaks divisively ... speaks harshly ... indulges in talking nonsense
... is covetous ... has cruel intentions ... has wrong view ... They're
creepy in body, speech, and mind. Doing crooked deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind, their destiny and rebirth are crooked.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is crooked is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in an exclusively painful hell, or among the species of
creepy animals. And what are the species of creepy animals? Snakes,
scorpions, centipedes, mongooses, cats, mice, owls, or whatever other
species of animal that creep away when they see humans. This is how a
being is born from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and
when you're reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient
beings are heirs to their deeds. Sentient beings are the owners of their
deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are their womb, their relative, and
their refuge. They shall be the heir of whatever deeds they do, whether
good or bad.

Take a certain person who gives up killing living creatures. They
renounce the rod and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full
of sympathy for all living beings. They're not creepy in body, speech,
and mind. Doing virtuous deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, their
destiny and rebirth is virtuous.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is virtuous is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in a heaven of perfect happiness, or in an eminent
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. This is how a being is born
from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and when you're
reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient beings are
heirs to their deeds.

Take someone else who gives up stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying
... divisive speech ... harsh speech ... talking nonsense ... They're
content ... kind hearted ... they have right view ... They're not creepy
in body, speech, and mind. Doing virtuous deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind, their destiny and rebirth is virtuous.

Someone whose destiny and rebirth is virtuous is reborn in one of two
places, I say: in a heaven of perfect happiness, or in an eminent
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. This is how a being is born
from a being. For your deeds determine your rebirth, and when you're
reborn contacts strike you. This is why I say that sentient beings are
heirs to their deeds.

Sentient beings are the owners of their deeds and heir to their deeds.
Deeds are their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be
the heir of whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad. This is the
exposition of the teaching on creepy creatures."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.217 Intentional (1st)  *Paṭhamasañcetanikasutta*

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.
And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional
deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action?
It's when a certain person kills living creatures. They're violent,
bloody-handed, a hardened killer, merciless to living beings.

They steal. With the intention to commit theft, they take the wealth or
belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They commit sexual misconduct. They have sex with women who have their
mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister, relatives, or
clan as guardian. They have sex with a woman who is protected on
principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is punishable by
law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of betrothal.

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action?
It's when a certain person lies. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they deliberately lie for
the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly reason.

They speak divisively. They repeat in one place what they heard in
another so as to divide people against each other. And so they divide
those who are harmonious, supporting division, delighting in division,
loving division, speaking words that promote division.

They speak harshly. They use the kinds of words that are cruel, nasty,
hurtful, offensive, bordering on anger, not leading to immersion.

They indulge in talking nonsense. Their speech is untimely, and is
neither factual nor beneficial. It has nothing to do with the teaching
or the training. Their words have no value, and are untimely,
unreasonable, rambling, and pointless.

These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action?
It's when someone is covetous. They covet the wealth and belongings of
others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have ill will and malicious intentions: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!'

They have wrong view. Their perspective is distorted: 'There's no
meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result
of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as
mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's
no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three
kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of
corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of
corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention,
with suffering as their outcome and result.

It's like throwing unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up.
In the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because
of these three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these
four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three
kinds of corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful
intention, with suffering as their outcome and result.

I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed and
accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in
this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I
don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds
that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have
skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There
are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention,
with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of
successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as
their outcome and result.

And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? It's when a
certain person gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They don't steal. They don't, with the intention to commit theft, take
the wealth or belongings of others from village or wilderness.

They give up sexual misconduct. They don't have sex with women who have
their mother, father, both mother and father, brother, sister,
relatives, or clan as guardian. They don't have sex with a woman who is
protected on principle, or who has a husband, or whose violation is
punishable by law, or even one who has been garlanded as a token of
betrothal.

These are the three kinds of successful bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? It's when a
certain person gives up lying. They're summoned to a council, an
assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court, and asked to
bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not knowing, they say
'I don't know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not seeing, they say 'I
don't see.' And seeing, they say 'I see.' They don't deliberately lie
for the sake of themselves or another, or for some trivial worldly
reason.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

These are the four kinds of successful verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? It's when
someone is content. They don't covet the wealth and belongings of
others: 'Oh, if only their belongings were mine!'

They have a kind heart and loving intentions: 'May these sentient beings
live free of enmity and ill will, untroubled and happy!'

They have right view, an undistorted perspective: 'There is meaning in
giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good
and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother
and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are
ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced,
and who describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own
insight.'

These are the three kinds of successful mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily
action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three
kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with
happiness as their outcome and result.

It's like throwing unfaling dice: they always fall the right side up. In
the same way, when their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings
are reborn in a good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of
successful bodily action, these four kinds of successful verbal action,
or these three kinds of successful mental action that have skillful
intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. I don't say that
intentional deeds that have been performed and accumulated are
eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in this very life,
or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I don't say that
suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds that have been
performed and accumulated."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.218 Intentional (2nd)  *Dutiyasañcetanikasutta*

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.
And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional
deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result. There are three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action
that have unskillful intention, with suffering as their outcome and
result.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action?
... These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of bodily
action.

And what are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action?
... These are the four kinds of corruption and failure of verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental action?
... These are the three kinds of corruption and failure of mental
action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of these three
kinds of corruption and failure of bodily action, these four kinds of
corruption and failure of verbal action, or these three kinds of
corruption and failure of mental action that have unskillful intention,
with suffering as their outcome and result.

I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed and
accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may be in
this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period. And I
don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional deeds
that have been performed and accumulated.

Now, there are three kinds of successful bodily action that have
skillful intention, with happiness as their outcome and result. There
are four kinds of successful verbal action that have skillful intention,
with happiness as their outcome and result. There are three kinds of
successful mental action that have skillful intention, with happiness as
their outcome and result.

And what are the three kinds of successful bodily action? ... These are
the three kinds of successful bodily action.

And what are the four kinds of successful verbal action? ... These are
the four kinds of successful verbal action.

And what are the three kinds of successful mental action? ... These are
the three kinds of successful mental action.

When their body breaks up, after death, sentient beings are reborn in a
good place, in heaven because of these three kinds of successful bodily
action, these four kinds of successful verbal action, or these three
kinds of successful mental action that have skillful intention, with
happiness as their outcome and result. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.219 The Body Born of Deeds  *Karajakāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I don't say that intentional deeds that have been performed
and accumulated are eliminated without being experienced. And that may
be in this very life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.
And I don't say that suffering is ended without experiencing intentional
deeds that have been performed and accumulated.

That noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They understand: 'Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it's
limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I've done don't
remain or persist there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Suppose a child had developed the heart's
release by love from their childhood on. Would they still do any bad
deed?"

"No, sir."

"Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?"

"No, sir. For if they don't do any bad deed, from where would suffering
afflict them?"

"This heart's release by love should be developed by women or men. For
neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. The mind is
what's inside mortal beings. They understand: 'Whatever bad deeds I have
done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience here. It
will not follow me to my next life.' The heart's release by love
developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise mendicant here who
has not penetrated to a higher freedom.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate spreading a heart
full of equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.

They understand: 'Formerly my mind was limited and undeveloped. Now it's
limitless and well developed. Whatever limited deeds I've done don't
remain or persist there.'

What do you think, mendicants? Suppose a child had developed the heart's
release by equanimity from their childhood on. Would they still do any
bad deed?"

"No, sir."

"Not doing any bad deed, would they still experience any suffering?"

"No, sir. For if they don't do any bad deed, from where would suffering
afflict them?"

"This heart's release by equanimity should be developed by women or men.
For neither women nor men take this body with them when they go. The
mind is what's inside mortal beings. They understand: 'Whatever bad
deeds I have done in the past with this deed-born body I will experience
here. It will not follow me to my next life.' The heart's release by
equanimity developed in this way leads to non-return for a wise
mendicant here who has not penetrated to a higher freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.220 Unprincipled Conduct  *Adhammacariyāsutta*

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"But what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm."

"I don't understand the detailed meaning of what Mister Gotama has said
in brief. Please, Mister Gotama, teach me this matter so I can
understand the detailed meaning."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," the brahmin replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of body,
fourfold by way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of body?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of
body.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct fourfold by way of speech?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is fourfold by way of
speech.

And how is unprincipled and immoral conduct threefold by way of mind?
... That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is threefold by way of
mind. That's how unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

Principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body, fourfold by
way of speech, and threefold by way of mind.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of body? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of body.

And how is principled and moral conduct fourfold by way of speech? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is fourfold by way of speech.

And how is principled and moral conduct threefold by way of mind? ...
That's how principled and moral conduct is threefold by way of mind.
That's how principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

