# The Chapter on Good

### AN 10.134 Good  *Sādhusutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is not good? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what
is not good. And what is good? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called what is
good."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.135 The Teaching of the Noble Ones  *Ariyadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the noble ones, and what
is not the teaching of the noble ones. ... And what is not the teaching
of the noble ones? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what is
not the teaching of the noble ones. And what is the teaching of the
noble ones? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the teaching of the noble
ones."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.136 Unskillful  *Akusalasutta*

"I will teach you the skillful and the unskillful ... And what is the
unskillful? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the unskillful. And what is
the skillful? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the skillful."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.137 Beneficial  *Atthasutta*

"I will teach you the beneficial and the harmful. ... And what is the
harmful? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the harmful. And what is
the beneficial? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the beneficial."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.138 The Teaching  *Dhammasutta*

"I will teach you what is the teaching and what is not the teaching. ...
And what is not the teaching? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech,
wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called what is
not the teaching. And what is the teaching? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This
is called the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.139 Defiled  *Sāsavasutta*

"I will teach you the defiled principle and the undefiled. ... And what
is the defiled principle? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the
defiled principle. And what is the undefiled principle? Right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. This is called the undefiled principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.140 Blameworthy  *Sāvajjasutta*

"I will teach you the blameworthy principle and the blameless principle.
... And what is the blameworthy principle? Wrong view, wrong thought,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong
mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This
is called the blameworthy principle. And what is the blameless
principle? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the blameless principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.141 Mortifying  *Tapanīyasutta*

"I will teach you the mortifying principle and the unmortifying. ... And
what is the mortifying principle? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong
speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness,
wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the
mortifying principle. And what is the unmortifying principle? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. This is called the unmortifying principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.142 Accumulation  *Ācayagāmisutta*

"I will teach you the principle that leads to accumulation and that
which leads to dispersal. ... And what is the principle that leads to
accumulation? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the principle that
leads to accumulation. And what is the principle that leads to
dispersal? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle that leads to
dispersal."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.143 With Suffering as Outcome  *Dukkhudrayasutta*

"I will teach you the principle that has suffering as outcome, and that
which has happiness as outcome. ... And what is the principle whose
outcome is suffering? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong
immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is the principle
whose outcome is suffering. And what is the principle whose outcome is
happiness? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is the principle whose outcome is
happiness."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.144 Result in Suffering  *Dukkhavipākasutta*

"I will teach you the principle that results in suffering and that which
results in happiness. ... And what principle results in suffering? Wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle that results in suffering. And
what principle results in happiness? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle that results in happiness."

