# The Chapter on a Protector

### AN 10.11 Lodgings  *Senāsanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five factors, using and frequenting
lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

And how does a mendicant have five factors? It's when a noble disciple
has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely
ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or
deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible
spiritual companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. That's how a mendicant has five factors.

And how does a lodging have five factors? It's when a lodging is neither
too far nor too near, but convenient for coming and going. It's not
bothered by people by day, and at night it's quiet and still. There's
little disturbance from flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.
While staying in that lodging the necessities of life---robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick---are easy to come by.
And in that lodging there are several senior mendicants who are very
learned, inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings,
the monastic law, and the outlines. From time to time they go up to
those mendicants and ask them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a lodging has five factors. A mendicant with five factors,
using and frequenting lodgings with five factors, will soon realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.12 Five Factors  *Pañcaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up
five factors and possesses five factors is called consummate,
accomplished, a supreme person.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant have five factors? It's when a mendicant has
the entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom,
and knowledge and vision of freedom. That's how a mendicant has five
factors.

In this teaching and training a mendicant who has given up five factors
and possesses five factors is called consummate, accomplished, a supreme
person.

> Sensual desire, ill will,\
> dullness and drowsiness,\
> restlessness, and doubt\
> are not found in a mendicant at all.
>
> One like this is accomplished\
> in an adept's ethics,\
> an adept's immersion,\
> and freedom and knowledge.
>
> Possessing these five factors,\
> and rid of five factors,\
> in this teaching and training\
> they're called 'consummate'."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.13 Fetters  *Saṁyojanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ten fetters. What ten? The five lower fetters and
the five higher fetters. What are the five lower fetters? Substantialist
view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and observances, sensual
desire, and ill will. These are the five lower fetters.

What are the five higher fetters? Desire for rebirth in the realm of
luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit,
restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five higher fetters. These
are the ten fetters."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.14 Hard-heartedness  *Cetokhilasutta*

"Mendicants, a monk or nun who has not given up five kinds of
hard-heartedness and has not severed five shackles of the heart can
expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by
night.

What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't given up?

Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness they haven't given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset
with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they haven't
given up. These are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they haven't
given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed? Firstly, a
mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind doesn't incline
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first shackle of the heart they haven't severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart they haven't
severed. These are the five shackles of the heart they haven't severed.

A monk or nun who has not given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness
and has not severed these five shackles of the heart can expect decline,
not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

It's like the moon in the waning fortnight. Whether by day or by night,
its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only
decline. In the same way, monk or nun who has not given up these five
kinds of hard-heartedness and has not severed these five shackles of the
heart can expect decline, not growth, in skillful qualities, whether by
day or by night.

A monk or nun who has given up five kinds of hard-heartedness and has
severed five shackles of the heart can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

<!--pg-->
What are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they've given up? Firstly, a
mendicant has no doubts about the Teacher. They're not uncertain,
undecided, or lacking confidence. This being so, their mind inclines
toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the
first kind of hard-heartedness they've given up.

Furthermore, a mendicant has no doubts about the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is not angry and
upset with their spiritual companions, not resentful or closed off. This
being so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness they've given
up. These are the five kinds of hard-heartedness they've given up.

What are the five shackles of the heart they've severed? Firstly, a
mendicant is rid of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and
craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind inclines toward
keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is the first
shackle of the heart they've severed.

Furthermore, a mendicant is rid of greed for the body ... They're rid of
greed for form ... They don't eat as much as they like until their belly
is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and
drowsing ... They don't lead the spiritual life wishing to be reborn in
one of the orders of gods: 'By this precept or observance or fervent
austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This being
so, their mind inclines toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and
striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart they've severed. These
are the five shackles of the heart they've severed.

A monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of hard-heartedness and
has severed these five shackles of the heart can expect growth, not
decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

It's like the moon in the waxing fortnight. Whether by day or by night,
its beauty, roundness, light, and diameter and circumference only grow.
In the same way, a monk or nun who has given up these five kinds of
hard-heartedness and has severed these five shackles of the heart can
expect growth, not decline, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by
night."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.15 Diligence  *Appamādasutta*

"Mendicants, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in
diligence and meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of
them.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and
meet at diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and
meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In
the same way, all skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at
diligence, and diligence is said to be the best of them.

Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. In the
same way ...

Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way ...

Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the
same way ...

All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the
same way ...

The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. In the same way ...

In the autumn the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates. In the same way ...

All the great rivers---that is, the Ganges, Yamunā,
Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---flow, slant, slope, and incline towards the ocean,
and the ocean is said to be the greatest of them. In the same way, all
skillful qualities are rooted in diligence and meet at diligence, and
diligence is said to be the best of them."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.16 Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods  *Āhuneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What ten? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha; an Independent Buddha; one freed both ways; one freed by wisdom;
a direct witness; one attained to view; one freed by faith; a follower
by faith; a follower of teachings; a lamb of the flock. These are the
ten people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.17 A Protector (1st)  *Paṭhamanāthasutta*

"Mendicants, you should live with a protector, not without one. Living
without a protector is suffering. There are ten qualities that serve as
protector. What ten? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the
monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the
rules they've undertaken. This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

You should live with a protector, not without one. Living without a
protector is suffering. These are the ten qualities that serve as
protector."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.18 A Protector (2nd)  *Dutiyanāthasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, you should live with a protector, not without one. Living
without a protector is suffering. There are ten qualities that serve as
protector. What ten? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the
monastic code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the
rules they've undertaken. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation,
mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or
junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being
treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants,
that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. Knowing this, the
mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that mendicant is
worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the
senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only
growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. Knowing
this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that
mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such
kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant
can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves
as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Knowing this, the
mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think that mendicant is
worth advising and instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the
senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only
growth, not decline. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior, middle, or junior---think
that mendicant is worth advising and instructing. Being treated with
such kindness by the senior, middle, and junior mendicants, that
mendicant can expect only growth, not decline. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. Knowing this, the mendicants---whether senior,
middle, or junior---think that mendicant is worth advising and
instructing. Being treated with such kindness by the senior, middle, and
junior mendicants, that mendicant can expect only growth, not decline.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

You should live with a protector, not without one. Living without a
protector is suffering. These are the ten qualities that serve as
protector."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.19 Abodes of the Noble Ones (1st)  *Paṭhamaariyāvāsasutta*

"There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide. What ten? A mendicant has given up
five factors, is endowed with six factors, has a single guard, has four
supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has
totally given up searching, has pure intentions, has stilled the
physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.
These are the ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.20 Abodes of the Noble Ones (2nd)  *Dutiyaariyāvāsasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Kurus, near the
Kuru town named Kammāsadamma. There the Buddha addressed
the mendicants:

"There are these ten abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of
the past, present, and future abide. What ten? A mendicant has given up
five factors, possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four
supports, has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has
totally given up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the
physical process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? It's when a mendicant,
seeing a sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain
equanimous, mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ...
Smelling an odor with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue
...

Feeling a touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind,
they're neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and
aware. That's how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. For example: the cosmos is eternal, or not
eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same
thing, or they are different things; after death, a realized one still
exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists,
or neither still exists nor no longer exists. A mendicant has dispelled,
eliminated, thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished
all these. That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual life. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when a
mendicant has given up intentions of sensuality, malice, and cruelty.
That's how a mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.

Mendicants, whether in the past, future, or present, all noble ones
abide in these same ten abodes of the noble ones. These are the ten
abodes of the noble ones in which the noble ones of the past, present,
and future abide."

