# The Chapter on Purified

### AN 10.123 First  *Paṭhamasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things are not purified and cleansed apart from
the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These ten things
are not purified and cleansed apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.124 Second  *Dutiyasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things don't arise apart from the Holy One's
training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things
that don't arise apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.125 Third  *Tatiyasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things are not very fruitful and beneficial apart
from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten
things that are not very fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy
One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.126 Fourth  *Catutthasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things don't culminate in the removal of greed,
hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. These are the ten things that don't culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.127 Fifth  *Pañcamasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These
are the ten things that don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.128 Sixth  *Chaṭṭhasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things don't arise to be developed and cultivated
apart from the Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These
are the ten things that don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart
from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.129 Seventh  *Sattamasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated are not very
fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy One's training. What ten?
Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and
right freedom. These are the ten things that when developed and
cultivated are not very fruitful and beneficial apart from the Holy
One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.130 Eighth  *Aṭṭhamasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated don't
culminate in the removal of greed, hate, and delusion apart from the
Holy One's training. What ten? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things
that when developed and cultivated don't culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.131 Ninth  *Navamasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten things when developed and cultivated don't lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment apart from the Holy One's training. What
ten? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. These are the ten things that when
developed and cultivated don't lead solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment
apart from the Holy One's training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.132 Tenth  *Dasamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ten wrong ways. What ten? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
These are the ten wrong ways."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.133 Eleventh  *Ekādasamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ten right ways. What ten? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
These are the ten right ways."

