# The Chapter on Your Own Mind

### AN 10.51 Your Own Mind  *Sacittasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I
often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness
or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I
often irritable or not? Am I often corrupted in mind or not? Am I often
disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often
immersed in samādhi or not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, irritable, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort,
zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness.
Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, free of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should
practice meditation further to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.52 With Sāriputta  *Sāriputtasutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!'

In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant's skillful
qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I often malicious or not? Am
I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness or not? Am I often
restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I often irritable or
not? Am I often defiled in mind or not? Am I often disturbed in body or
not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often immersed in
samādhi or not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, angry, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort,
zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness.
Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should
practice meditation further to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.53 Stagnation  *Ṭhitisutta*

"Mendicants, I don't praise stagnation in skillful qualities, let alone
decline. I praise growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
decline.

And how is there decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
growth? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor
grow in them. I call this decline in skillful qualities, not stagnation
or growth. This is how there's decline in skillful qualities, not
stagnation or growth.

And how is there stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline or
growth? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither decline nor
grow in them. I call this stagnation in skillful qualities, not decline
or growth. This is how there's stagnation in skillful qualities, not
decline or growth.

And how is there growth in skillful qualities, not stagnation or
decline? It's when a mendicant has a certain degree of faith, ethics,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence. Those qualities neither stagnate nor
decline in them. I call this growth in skillful qualities, not
stagnation or decline. This is how there's growth in skillful qualities,
not stagnation or decline.

If a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind, then they
should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Am I often covetous or not? Am I
often malicious or not? Am I often overcome with dullness and drowsiness
or not? Am I often restless or not? Am I often doubtful or not? Am I
often irritable or not? Am I often defiled in mind or not? Am I often
disturbed in body or not? Am I often energetic or not? Am I often
immersed in samādhi or not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
covetous, malicious, overcome with dullness and drowsiness, restless,
doubtful, irritable, defiled in mind, disturbed in body, lazy, and not
immersed in samādhi.' In order to give up those bad,
unskillful qualities, they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort,
zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness.
Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I am often
content, kind-hearted, rid of dullness and drowsiness, calm, confident,
loving, pure in mind, undisturbed in body, energetic, and immersed in
samādhi.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they should
practice meditation further to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.54 Serenity  *Samathasutta*

"Mendicants, if a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind,
then they should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my
own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!' In the same way, checking is very helpful for
a mendicant's skillful qualities. 'Do I have internal serenity of heart
or not? Do I have the higher wisdom of discernment of principles or
not?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have serenity
but not discernment.' Grounded on serenity, they should practice
meditation to get discernment. After some time they have both serenity
and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have
discernment but not serenity.' Grounded on discernment, they should
practice meditation to get serenity. After some time they have both
serenity and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have neither
serenity nor discernment.' In order to get those skillful qualities,
they should apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head
were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm,
effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational
awareness. In the same way, in order to get those skillful qualities,
that mendicant should apply intense enthusiasm ... After some time they
have both serenity and discernment.

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows this: 'I have both
serenity and discernment.' Grounded on those skillful qualities, they
should practice meditation further to end the defilements.

I say that there are two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear. I say that there are two kinds of almsfood:
that which you should eat, and that which you shouldn't eat. I say that
there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent. I say that there are two kinds of village or town:
those you should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent. I say that
there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent. I say that there are two kinds of people: those you
should frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.

'I say that there are two kinds of robes: those you should wear, and
those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I said, but why did I say it?
Well, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this robe, unskillful
qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should not wear
that kind of robe. Whereas, should you know of a robe: 'When I wear this
robe, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful qualities grow.' You
should wear that kind of robe. 'I say that there are two kinds of robes:
those you should wear, and those you shouldn't wear.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat,
and that which you shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of almsfood: 'When I eat this almsfood,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not eat that kind of almsfood. Whereas, should you know of almsfood:
'When I eat this almsfood, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should eat that kind of almsfood. 'I say that there
are two kinds of almsfood: that which you should eat, and that which you
shouldn't eat.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of lodging. Whereas, should you know of a
lodging: 'When I frequent this lodging, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of lodging.
'I say that there are two kinds of lodging: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why
did I say it? Well, should you know of a village or town: 'When I
frequent this village or town, unskillful qualities grow, and skillful
qualities decline.' You should not frequent that kind of village or
town. Whereas, should you know of a village or town: 'When I frequent
this village or town, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of village or town. 'I
say that there are two kinds of village or town: those you should
frequent, and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a country: 'When I frequent this country,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of country. Whereas, should you know of a
country: 'When I frequent this country, unskillful qualities decline,
and skillful qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of country.
'I say that there are two kinds of country: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it.

'I say that there are two kinds of people: those you should frequent,
and those you shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, but why did I say
it? Well, should you know of a person: 'When I frequent this person,
unskillful qualities grow, and skillful qualities decline.' You should
not frequent that kind of person. Whereas, should you know of a person:
'When I frequent this person, unskillful qualities decline, and skillful
qualities grow.' You should frequent that kind of person. 'I say that
there are two kinds of people: those you should frequent, and those you
shouldn't frequent.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.55 Decline  *Parihānasutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, they speak of a person liable to decline, and one not liable
to decline. But how did the Buddha define a person liable to decline,
and one not liable to decline?"

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May
Venerable Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of
this. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"How did the Buddha define a person liable to decline? It's when a
mendicant doesn't get to hear a teaching they haven't heard before. They
forget those teachings they have heard. They don't keep exercising the
teachings with which they are already familiar. And they don't come to
understand what they haven't understood before. That's how the Buddha
defined a person liable to decline.

And how did the Buddha define a person not liable to decline? It's when
a mendicant gets to hear a teaching they haven't heard before. They
remember those teachings they have heard. They keep exercising the
teachings with which they are already familiar. And they come to
understand what they haven't understood before. That's how the Buddha
defined a person not liable to decline.

If a mendicant isn't skilled in the ways of another's mind, then they
should train themselves: 'I will be skilled in the ways of my own mind.'

And how is a mendicant skilled in the ways of their own mind? Suppose
there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or blemish there, they'd
try to remove it. But if they don't see any dirt or blemish there,
they're happy with that, as they've got all they wished for: 'How
fortunate that I'm clean!'

In the same way, checking is very helpful for a mendicant's skillful
qualities. 'Is contentment often found in me or not? Is kind-heartedness
often found in me or not? Is freedom from dullness and drowsiness often
found in me or not? Is calm often found in me or not? Is confidence
often found in me or not? Is love often found in me or not? Is purity of
mind often found in me or not? Is internal joy with the teaching found
in me or not? Is internal serenity of heart found in me or not? Is the
higher wisdom of discernment of principles found in me or not?'

Suppose a mendicant, while checking, doesn't see any of these skillful
qualities in themselves. In order to get them they should apply intense
enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, they should apply intense enthusiasm to get those skillful
qualities ...

Suppose a mendicant, while checking, sees some of these skillful
qualities in themselves, but doesn't see others. Grounded on the
skillful qualities they see, they should apply intense enthusiasm,
effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational
awareness in order to get the skillful qualities they don't see. Suppose
your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it, you'd
apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, grounded on the
skillful qualities they see, they should apply intense enthusiasm to get
those skillful qualities they don't see.

But suppose a mendicant, while checking, sees all of these skillful
qualities in themselves. Grounded on all these skillful qualities they
should practice meditation further to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.56 Perceptions (1st)  *Paṭhamasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What ten? The perceptions of ugliness, death,
repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole world,
impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and not-self in suffering,
giving up, fading away, and cessation. These ten perceptions, when
developed and cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They
culminate in freedom from death and end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.57 Perceptions (2nd)  *Dutiyasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these ten perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What ten? The perceptions of impermanence,
not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction with the whole
world, a skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open
corpse, and a bloated corpse. These ten perceptions, when developed and
cultivated, are very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom
from death and end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.58 Rooted  *Mūlakasutta*

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their
culmination? What is their final end?' How would you answer them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'Reverends,
all things have what as their root? What produces them? What is their
origin? What is their meeting place? What is their chief? What is their
ruler? What is their overseer? What is their core? What is their
culmination? What is their final end?' You should answer them:
'Reverends, all things are rooted in desire. They are produced by
application of mind. Contact is their origin. Feeling is their meeting
place. Immersion is their chief. Mindfulness is their ruler. Wisdom is
their overseer. Freedom is their core. They culminate in freedom from
death. And extinguishment is their final end.' When questioned by
wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer them."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.59 Going Forth  *Pabbajjāsutta*

"So you should train like this: 'Our minds will be consolidated as they
were when we went forth, and arisen bad unskillful qualities will not
occupy our minds. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of
impermanence, not-self, ugliness, and drawbacks. Knowing what is fair
and unfair in the world, our minds will be consolidated in that
perception. Knowing continued existence and ending of existence in the
world, our minds will be consolidated in that perception. Knowing the
origination and ending of the world, our minds will be consolidated in
that perception. Our minds will be consolidated in the perceptions of
giving up, fading away, and cessation.' That's how you should train.

When your minds are consolidated in these ten perceptions, you can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.60 With Girimānanda  *Girimānandasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Now at that time
Venerable Girimānanda was sick, suffering, gravely ill.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Girimānanda is sick, suffering, gravely
ill. Sir, please go to Venerable Girimānanda out of
sympathy."

"Ānanda, if you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda
these ten perceptions, it's possible that after hearing them his illness
will die down on the spot.

What ten? The perceptions of impermanence, not-self, ugliness,
drawbacks, giving up, fading away, cessation, dissatisfaction with the
whole world, impermanence of all conditions, and mindfulness of
breathing.

And what is the perception of impermanence? It's when a mendicant has
gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are impermanent.' And so they meditate observing
impermanence in the five grasping aggregates. This is called the
perception of impermanence.

And what is the perception of not-self? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'The eye and sights, ear and sounds, nose and
smells, tongue and tastes, body and touches, and mind and ideas are
not-self.' And so they meditate observing not-self in the six interior
and exterior sense fields. This is called the perception of not-self.

And what is the perception of ugliness? It's when a mendicant examines
their own body up from the soles of the feet and down from the tips of
the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds of filth. 'In this
body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews,
bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs,
intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood,
sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.' And so
they meditate observing ugliness in this body. This is called the
perception of ugliness.

And what is the perception of drawbacks? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This body has much suffering and many drawbacks.
For this body is beset with many kinds of affliction, such as the
following. Diseases of the eye, inner ear, nose, tongue, body, head,
outer ear, mouth, teeth, and lips. Cough, asthma, catarrh, inflammation,
fever, stomach ache, fainting, dysentery, gastric pain, cholera,
leprosy, boils, eczema, tuberculosis, epilepsy, herpes, itch, scabs,
smallpox, scabies, hemorrhage, diabetes, piles, pimples, and ulcers.
Afflictions stemming from disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their
conjunction. Afflictions caused by change in weather, by not taking care
of yourself, by overexertion, or as the result of past deeds. Cold,
heat, hunger, thirst, defecation, and urination.' And so they meditate
observing drawbacks in this body. This is called the perception of
drawbacks.

And what is the perception of giving up? It's when a mendicant doesn't
tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen, and
they don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but
give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This
is called the perception of giving up.

And what is the perception of fading away? It's when a mendicant has
gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the
stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, extinguishment.' This is called the
perception of fading away.

And what is the perception of cessation? It's when a mendicant has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, and
reflects like this: 'This is peaceful; this is sublime---that is, the
stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, cessation, extinguishment.' This is called the
perception of cessation.

And what is the perception of dissatisfaction with the whole world? It's
when a mendicant lives giving up and not grasping on to the attraction
and grasping to the world, the mental fixation, insistence, and
underlying tendencies. This is called the perception of dissatisfaction
with the whole world.

And what is the perception of the impermanence of all conditions? It's
when a mendicant is horrified, repelled, and disgusted with all
conditions. This is called the perception of the impermanence of all
conditions.

And what is mindfulness of breathing? It's when a mendicant has gone to
a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, sits down
cross-legged, sets their body straight, and establishes mindfulness in
their presence. Just mindful, they breathe in. Mindful, they breathe
out. Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.'
Breathing out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.' When
breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.' Breathing
out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole body.'They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical process.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the physical process.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing rapture.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing bliss.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing bliss.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing mental processes.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing mental processes.'They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling mental processes.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling mental processes.'They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the mind.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in gladdening the mind.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out gladdening the mind.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in immersing the mind in samādhi.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out immersing the mind in
samādhi.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in freeing
the mind.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out freeing the mind.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing impermanence.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe out observing fading away.' They
practice like this: 'I'll breathe in observing cessation.' They practice
like this: 'I'll breathe out observing cessation.' They practice like
this: 'I'll breathe in observing letting go.' They practice like this:
'I'll breathe out observing letting go.' This is called mindfulness of
breathing.

If you were to recite to the mendicant Girimānanda these
ten perceptions, it's possible that after hearing them his illness will
die down on the spot."

Then Ānanda, having learned these ten perceptions from the Buddha
himself, went to Girimānanda and recited them. Then after
Girimānanda heard these ten perceptions his illness died
down on the spot. And that's how he recovered from that illness.

