# The Chapter on Benefits

### AN 10.1 What's the Purpose?  *Kimatthiyasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics?"

"Ānanda, having no regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful
ethics."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets?"

"Joy is the purpose and benefit of having no regrets."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of joy?"

"Rapture ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of rapture?"

"Tranquility ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of tranquility?"

"Bliss ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of bliss?"

"Immersion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of immersion?"

"Truly knowing and seeing ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing?"

"Disillusionment and dispassion ..."

"But what is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion?"

"Knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of
disillusionment and dispassion.

So, Ānanda, the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics is not having
regrets. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Rapture
is the purpose and benefit of joy. Tranquility is the purpose and
benefit of rapture. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility.
Immersion is the purpose and benefit of bliss. Truly knowing and seeing
is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Disillusionment and dispassion
is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Knowledge and
vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of disillusionment and
dispassion. So, Ānanda, skillful ethics progressively lead up to the
highest."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.2 Making a Wish  *Cetanākaraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical conduct, need
not make a wish: 'May I have no regrets!' It's only natural that an
ethical person has no regrets. When you have no regrets you need not
make a wish: 'May I feel joy!' It's only natural that joy springs up
when you have no regrets. When you feel joy you need not make a wish:
'May I experience rapture!' It's only natural that rapture arises when
you're joyful. When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a
wish: 'May my body become tranquil!' It's only natural that your body
becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture. When your body is
tranquil you need not make a wish: 'May I feel bliss!' It's only natural
to feel bliss when your body is tranquil. When you feel bliss you need
not make a wish: 'May my mind be immersed in samādhi!' It's
only natural for the mind to be immersed in samādhi when
you feel bliss. When your mind is immersed in samādhi you
need not make a wish: 'May I truly know and see!' It's only natural to
truly know and see when your mind is immersed in samādhi.
When you truly know and see you need not make a wish: 'May I become
disillusioned and dispassionate!' It's only natural to become
disillusioned and dispassionate when you truly know and see. When you're
disillusioned and dispassionate you need not make a wish: 'May I realize
the knowledge and vision of freedom!' It's only natural to realize the
knowledge and vision of freedom when you're disillusioned and
dispassionate.

And so, mendicants, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose
and benefit of disillusionment and dispassion. Disillusionment and
dispassion is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Truly
knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit of immersion. Immersion is
the purpose and benefit of bliss. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of
tranquility. Tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture. Rapture
is the purpose and benefit of joy. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not
having regrets. Not having regrets is the purpose and benefit of
skillful ethics. And so, mendicants, good qualities flow on and fill up
from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.3 Vital Conditions (1st)  *Paṭhamaupanisasutta*

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no
joy, one who lacks joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When
there is no rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital
condition for tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks
tranquility has destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no
bliss, one who lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right
immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who lacks right
immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge and vision.
When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge
and vision has destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and
dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who
lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.4 Vital Conditions (2nd)  *Dutiyaupanisasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants ...
"Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital
condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who has
regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom. Suppose there was a tree that lacked
branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would
not grow to fullness. In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks
ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for having no regrets. When
there are regrets, one who has regrets has destroyed a vital condition
for joy. ... One who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed
a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. ... One who has
fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom. Suppose there was a tree that was
complete with branches and foliage. Its shoots, bark, softwood, and
heartwood would grow to fullness. In the same way, an ethical person,
who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital condition for not having
regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled
a vital condition for joy. ... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and
dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.5 Vital Conditions (3rd)  *Tatiyaupanisasutta*

There Venerable Ānanda addressed the mendicants ... "Reverends, an
unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital condition for
having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who has regrets has
destroyed a vital condition for joy. When there is no joy, one who lacks
joy has destroyed a vital condition for rapture. When there is no
rapture, one who lacks rapture has destroyed a vital condition for
tranquility. When there is no tranquility, one who lacks tranquility has
destroyed a vital condition for bliss. When there is no bliss, one who
lacks bliss has destroyed a vital condition for right immersion. When
there is no right immersion, one who lacks right immersion has destroyed
a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is no true
knowledge and vision, one who lacks true knowledge and vision has
destroyed a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is no disillusionment and dispassion, one who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for having no regrets. When there are regrets, one who
has regrets has destroyed a vital condition for joy. ... One who lacks
disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for not having regrets. When there are no regrets, one who has
no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy. When there is joy,
one who has fulfilled joy has fulfilled a vital condition for rapture.
When there is rapture, one who has fulfilled rapture has fulfilled a
vital condition for tranquility. When there is tranquility, one who has
fulfilled tranquility has fulfilled a vital condition for bliss. When
there is bliss, one who has fulfilled bliss has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for not having regrets. When there are no
regrets, one who has no regrets has fulfilled a vital condition for joy.
... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.6 Immersion  *Samādhisutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in
fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this
world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they
would still perceive."

"It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this
world in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet they
would still perceive."

"But how could this be, sir?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like this. They
wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air
in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of infinite space in
the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness
in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness
in the dimension of nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. And they wouldn't perceive this world in this world, or
the other world in the other world. And yet they would still perceive."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.7 Sāriputta  *Sāriputtasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to Sāriputta:

"Could it be, reverend Sāriputta, that a mendicant might
gain a state of immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in
earth, water in water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't
perceive the dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite
space, the dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of
infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. And they
wouldn't perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the
other world. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, Reverend Ānanda."

"But how could this be?"

"Reverend Ānanda, this one time I was staying right here at
Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. There I gained a state of
immersion like this. I didn't perceive earth in earth, water in water,
fire in fire, or air in air. And I didn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. And I didn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And yet I still
perceived."

"But at that time what did Reverend Sāriputta perceive?"

"One perception arose in me and another perception ceased: 'The
cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of
continued existence is extinguishment.' Suppose there was a burning pile
of twigs. One flame would arise and another would cease. In the same
way, one perception arose in me and another perception ceased: 'The
cessation of continued existence is extinguishment. The cessation of
continued existence is extinguishment.' At that time I perceived that
the cessation of continued existence is extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.8 Inspiring All Around: the Absorptions  *Jhānasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful and ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and
ethical, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an expert in the
monastic law ... they don't stay in the wilderness, in remote lodgings
... they don't get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this
life that belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty ... they don't realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives in the wilderness,
in remote lodgings, one who gets the four absorptions when they want,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're
complete in that respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is
impressive all around, and is complete in every respect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.9 Inspiring All Around: the Peaceful Liberations  *Santavimokkhasutta*

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. ... they're not learned. ...
they're not a Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they
don't teach Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an
expert in the training ... they don't stay in the wilderness, in remote
lodgings ... they don't have direct meditative experience of the
peaceful liberations that are formless, transcending form ... they don't
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should
fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned,
a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma
to the assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who lives
in the wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless
liberations, and one who lives having realized the ending of
defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the monastic law, one who lives in the
wilderness, in remote lodgings, one who gets the formless liberations,
and one who lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're
complete in that respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is
impressive all around, and is complete in every respect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.10 Inspiring All Around: the Three Knowledges  *Vijjāsutta*

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. So they're incomplete in that
respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful and
ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're complete
in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they're not an expert in the
monastic law ... they don't recollect their many kinds of past lives ...
they don't, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, see
sentient beings passing away and being reborn ... they don't realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill
it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma
speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the
assembly with assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects
their many kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses
the human sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one
who lives having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they are faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, an expert in the training, one who recollects their many
kinds of past lives, one who with clairvoyance that surpasses the human
sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in that
respect. A mendicant who has these ten qualities is impressive all
around, and is complete in every respect."

