# The Chapter on Similarity

### AN 11.22--29 Untitled Discourses on the Eye  *\~*

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can't maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd doesn't know form, is
unskilled in characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't
dress wounds, doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know
satisfaction, doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks
dry, and doesn't show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and
leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can't maintain
and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can't meditate
observing impermanence in the eye ...

suffering ...

not-self ...

ending ...

vanishing ...

fading away ...

cessation ...

letting go ..."

### AN 11.30--69 Untitled Discourses on the Ear, Etc.  *\~*

... "... ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ..."

### AN 11.70--117 Untitled Discourses on Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
..."

### AN 11.118--165 Untitled Discourses on Eye Consciousness, Etc.  *\~*

... "... eye consciousness ... ear consciousness ... nose consciousness
... tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness.
..."

### AN 11.166--213 Untitled Discourses on Eye Contact, Etc.  *\~*

... "... eye contact ... ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact
... body contact ... mind contact. ..."

### AN 11.214--261 Untitled Discourses on Feeling Born of Eye Contact, Etc.  *\~*

... "... feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ...
feeling born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ...
feeling born of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact ...

### AN 11.262--309 Untitled Discourses on Perception of Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... perception of sights ... perception of sounds ... perception of
smells ... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception
of ideas. ..."

### AN 11.310--357 Untitled Discourses on Intention Regarding Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... intention regarding sights ... intention regarding sounds ...
intention regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention
regarding touches ... intention regarding ideas. ..."

### AN 11.358--405 Untitled Discourses on Craving For Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... Craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for
smells ... craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for
ideas. ..."

### AN 11.406--453 Untitled Discourses on Thoughts About Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... thoughts about sights ... thoughts about sounds ... thoughts
about smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ...
thoughts about ideas. ..."

### AN 11.454--501 Untitled Discourses on Considerations Regarding Sights, Etc.  *\~*

... "... considerations regarding sights ... considerations regarding
sounds ... considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding
tastes ... considerations regarding touches ... meditate observing
impermanence in considerations about ideas ... meditate observing
suffering ... meditate observing not-self ... meditate observing ending
... meditate observing vanishing ... meditate observing fading away ...
meditate observing cessation ... meditate observing letting go. ..."

### AN 11.502--981 Untitled Discourses on the Eye, Etc.  *\~*

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd knows form ...

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can meditate
observing impermanence in the eye ... meditate observing letting go.
..."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### AN 11.982 Untitled Discourse on Greed  *\~*

"For insight into greed, eleven things should be developed. What eleven?
The first, second, third, and fourth absorptions; the heart's releases
by love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity; the dimensions of
infinite space, infinite consciousness, and nothingness. For insight
into greed, these eleven things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.983--991 Untitled Discourses on Greed  *\~*

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ... these eleven things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.992--1151 Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc.  *\~*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... For the letting go of negligence, these eleven things
should be developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.
