::::::::::: center
::: large
:::

::: normalsize
*translated and introduced by*
:::

::: LARGE
[Bhikkhu Sujato]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: normalsize
AN 1--3
:::

::: Large
[]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: large
[SuttaCentral]{.smallcaps}
:::
:::::::::::

:::: footnotesize
*Numbered Discourses* is a translation of the Aṅguttaranikāya by Bhikkhu
Sujato.

Creative Commons Zero (CC0)

To the extent possible under law, Bhikkhu Sujato has waived all
copyright and related or neighboring rights to *Numbered Discourses*.

This work is published from Australia.

::: center
*This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.*
:::

Web publication date

:   2018

This edition

:   2025-01-25 12:18:21

Publication type

:   paperback

Edition

:   ed5

Number of volumes

:   5

Publication ISBN

:   978-1-76132-037-8

Volume ISBN

:   978-1-76132-100-9

Publication URL

:   <https://suttacentral.net/editions/an/en/sujato>

Source URL

:   <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/an>

Publication number

:   scpub5

Map of Jambudīpa is by Jonas David Mitja Lang, and is released by him
under Creative Commons Zero (CC0).

Published by SuttaCentral

*SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia*
::::

:::: center
::: epigraph
These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are well organized,
and the meaning is correctly interpreted. When the words and phrases are
well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. These two things
lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

[]{.smallcaps}\
\
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} 2.20
:::
::::

![image](/app/sutta_publisher/images/jambudipa_map.png)
![image](/app/sutta_publisher/images/jambudipa_map.png)

## The SuttaCentral Editions Series {#the-suttacentral-editions-series .unnumbered}

Since 2005 SuttaCentral has provided access to the texts, translations,
and parallels of early Buddhist texts. In 2018 we started creating and
publishing our translations of these seminal spiritual classics. The
"Editions" series now makes selected translations available as books in
various forms, including print, PDF, and EPUB.

Editions are selected from our most complete, well-crafted, and reliable
translations. They aim to bring these texts to a wider audience in forms
that reward mindful reading. Care is taken with every detail of the
production, and we aim to meet or exceed professional best standards in
every way. These are the core scriptures underlying the entire Buddhist
tradition, and we believe that they deserve to be preserved and made
available in the highest quality without compromise.

SuttaCentral is a charitable organization. Our work is accomplished by
volunteers and through the generosity of our donors. Everything we
create is offered to all of humanity free of any copyright or licensing
restrictions.

## Preface {#preface .unnumbered}

The topic of the future weighs heavily on the mind of the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}. We live in that future or beyond it. The "future
perils" of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} (AN 5.77--80) are upon us and have
been for quite some time. King Ashoka referred to these suttas, which
include the peril of corruption in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}; perhaps he
worried that his generosity, though intended to support Buddhism, would
ultimately lead to its decay.

Today the future perils are greater than ever. It is as if the seven
suns are appearing in the sky (AN 7.66). We want to face the future with
hope for a better life, but the horizon dims and draws closer, while we
clutch our loved ones and prepare for the worst.

It was the novelist William Gibson who said, "the future is already
here---it's just not very evenly distributed". His saying conceals
layers of meaning. The future is here because we see scientific,
technological, and human marvels every day that are far beyond our
comprehension. Yet such advances are for the few, and only trickle
gradually, if at all, to people in need. The future is also here in a
negative sense, in that the catastrophic effects of climate collapse are
readily apparent; and yet there too, their effects are unevenly
distributed, massively impacting those who have the least capacity to
deal with them.

The way of the Dhamma is to neither deny such things nor to be paralyzed
by them, but to live, urgently and vitally, in the present. We live as
if the future was uncertain, because it is. Our only certainty is that
all this will disappear.

The Buddha stayed calm in the face of terrors. Living well now, we let
the future take care of itself. The Buddha did not pretend to be able to
control the future, so why should we?

As a Buddhist, I might rephrase Gibson's saying: "the present is already
here---it's just not very evenly distributed". The art of meditation is
the art of presence, and in that presence, we can be grateful for all
that we have, mindful of all our blessings, and fearless when facing the
future. It is when we lose our presence that our fears can overcome us.
So let us not lose our presence.

## The Numbered Discourses: things that are useful every day {#the-numbered-discourses-things-that-are-useful-every-day .unnumbered}

::: flushright
*Bhikkhu Sujato, 2019*
:::

The [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} is the last and longest
of the four primary divisions of the Sutta [Piṭaka]{lang="sa"}. The word
*[aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}* means "up by one factor", i.e. "incremental".
It refers to the fact that the discourses are arranged by numbered sets,
with the numbers increasing by one. I have translated it as *Numbered
Discourses*, while previously it has been translated as the *Numerical
Discourses* or the *Gradual Sayings*.

SuttaCentral follows Bhikkhu Bodhi's translation in counting 8122
discourses in total. The summary verse at the end of the collection,
however, says there are 9,557 suttas. This scribal remark does not say
how this count was arrived at; it must have been quite a process to
count so many discourses when dealing only with palm-leaf manuscripts.
In any case, as with the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}, this
count is largely a product of discourses repeated according to
templates. Many of these consist only of a single word; indeed, the
process of abbreviation is carried to such extremes that hundreds of
suttas do not exist at all in the text; they are merely numbers to be
filled out. Also, in the case of the Ones and Twos, most of the suttas
are longer texts that have been divided to make the numbers. On
SuttaCentral, these are treated as if one *vagga* was a sutta, and the
abbreviated texts likewise are combined. If we count the files of the
texts combined in this way, we arrive at more reasonable, but still very
large, 1407 texts of substance.

The focus of the *Numbered Discourses* is on practical matters of
everyday relevance. Guidelines of ethics and character predominate. If
the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} gathers the chief
teachings on *doctrines*, the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} gathers the
teachings on *persons*. The concerns of the lay community are a major
focus, and many teachings deal with how to teach.

The use of numbered sets is found throughout the Buddhist texts, but
here it becomes the main organizing principle. The typical
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} discourse consists of a statement that there is
certain number of something; then an explanation of each item; then a
conclusion that echoes the introduction. Sometimes a verse is added that
summarizes the content. This formal pattern is highly optimized to
reinforce learning and memorization. It is, in essence, the same format
that is used in the nightly news: begin by listing the news items for
today; give the stories of each of the items; and then summarize the
highlights once more. The use of numbered sets remains popular today,
with the "listicle" being a favorite format for internet articles.

Unlike these modern examples, however, the sets of teachings in the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} are strongly structured. They are not merely
collections of items on a theme, but make up an integrated sequence. The
first item is the most fundamental; the subsequent items evolve from or
build upon that; and the final item caps off the sequence.

For this reason the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} provides an excellent entry
point to the canon, especially for those with a limited amount of time.
It only takes a few minutes to read a sutta, and it will contain within
itself a complete and useful teaching.

The [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} has a counterpart in the
[Ekottarikāgama]{lang="sa"} preserved in the Chinese canon (EA). The
[Ekottarikāgama]{lang="sa"} is a peculiar text of uncertain (possibly
[Mahāsaṅghika]{lang="sa"}) affiliation, and it differs from the Pali
text to a much greater extent than the parallels for DN, MN, and SN. In
addition, there are two partial Ekottarikas in Chinese, as well as
several independent Ekottarika-style suttas. Moreover, a substantial
portion of a Sanskrit [Ekottarāgama]{lang="sa"} was discovered at Gilgit
and has been edited and partially reconstructed by
[Tripāṭhi]{lang="sa"}. While it is difficult to generalize, it seems as
if most of these materials lie closer to the Pali text than the main EA
in Chinese.

### How the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} is Organized {#how-the-aṅguttara-is-organized .unnumbered}

The [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} consists of major "books"
(*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*) numbered one through eleven. Each of these
contains discourses consisting of the corresponding number of items. As
usual, the discourses are gathered into *vaggas*, which sometimes have a
loose theme. Each *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*, except the first, organizes its
*vaggas* into *[paṇṇāsas]{lang="sa"}*.

I don't know why the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} counts to eleven; I would
expect a round number. Eleven is shared in common with the Chinese
[Ekottarikāgama]{lang="sa"}, which suggests it was an early feature, yet
it does not appear to be driven by the texts themselves, as most of the
items in the Book of the Elevens consist of teachings familiar
elsewhere, with the addition of an item or two.

It sometimes feels as if the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} was assembled from
leftovers. After the long suttas were gathered in the Majjhima and
[Dīgha]{lang="sa"}, and the shorter suttas on central themes into the
[Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"}, a large mass of texts remained that resisted easy
categorization. This included many fascinating and profound teachings,
as well as a large mass of stock repetitions, and it trailed off into
odds and ends of increasingly obscure value. It's as if the redactors,
faced with a warehouse of leftovers and bric-à-brac, tried their best to
shelve and stack the items in a logical way, but were often left with
just plonking things on shelves as best they could. Since the texts
usually had a distinct number in the teaching, this was taken as the
organizational principle, in lieu of anything more meaningful. Even
texts that don't explicitly mention a number can often be analyzed into
a set of items, so they could be included too. (See for example [AN
3.31](https://suttacentral.net/an3.31) and [AN
3.32](https://suttacentral.net/an3.32).)

To be clear, it should not be thought that the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}
lacks the standard teachings familiar from the rest of the
*[nikāyas]{lang="sa"}*. On the contrary, we find the four absorptions
([AN 3.58](https://suttacentral.net/an3.58)), the four noble truths and
dependent origination ([AN 3.61](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61)), the
faculties and powers ([AN 4.163](https://suttacentral.net/an4.163); the
latter in some detail at [AN
5.12--16](https://suttacentral.net/an5.12)), the threefold training ([AN
3.81](https://suttacentral.net/an3.81)), the divine meditations ([AN
3.63](https://suttacentral.net/an3.63)), and many more. But such
teachings are scattered throughout a large mass of suttas on a diverse
range of topics.

In the introduction to his translation, Bhikkhu Bodhi practically
abandons any attempt to make sense of the structure. He gives an example
of a chapter with several seemingly unrelated discourses, remarking:
"With such apparently arbitrary organization, one cannot but wonder what
the compilers had in mind." (*The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha*,
introduction, p. 22). As a result, rather than analyze the content as it
occurs in the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}, he developed an extensive and
carefully-considered thematic analysis. [This essay is available on
SuttaCentral](https://suttacentral.net/an-introduction-bodhi), and I
encourage anyone interested in a serious study of the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} to read it.

I would like to approach the material from a different perspective,
however, one that lies closer to the experience of reading the text. I
find Bhikkhu Bodhi's question an intriguing one: what were the redactors
thinking?

While there is no doubt that the sequence of suttas and ideas in the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} is to some extent chaotic, is it plausible that
the same body of people who displayed such rigorous dedication to
classification in the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} should simply abandon their
efforts in the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}? Perhaps to understand the
redactors better, and through them the teachings that they worked with,
we must approach the problem in a new way.

Here are three organizational principles that I have noticed while
reading the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}:

1.  Numerological meaning.

2.  Thematic clusters, segues, and arcs.

3.  Spaced repetition.

Below I will show how these things work out over the first three
*[nipātas]{lang="sa"}*. In this way, I hope to guide a reader through
the wilds until they feel comfortable proceeding on their own.

It is surely not the case that these are the only organizational
principles at work. Nor is it the case that they fully explain all, or
even most, of the randomness. But they do, I believe, hint at a guiding
understanding that shaped the collection in the form we have it today.

One general thought first. Much of how we organize and relate to the
world is not through reason but through association. If we think of it
in terms of the five aggregates, a collection such as the
[Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} has an overall structure that
is deliberately thought through and constructed, i.e. it is based on
rational choices or *[saṅkhārās]{lang="sa"}*. Perhaps what we need to
look for in the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} is a different way of thinking,
one based on perception, memory, and association (*[saññā]{lang="sa"}*).

But why would such a large mass of texts be organized in such a way? The
answer is not hard to find. Like so many of the principles that organize
the texts, it is for memorization. For a reciter who has to keep
hundreds of texts in order, *any* kind of connection works. It doesn't
matter if it's the topic, a shared word, a syntax, a rhyme, or anything
else. Perception recognizes patterns. It associates one thing with the
next, regardless of how significant the connecting feature is.

Imagine, if you will, that you're organizing your library. You could use
a rational system: alphabetical order, subject matter, or size to fit
your shelves. But it's your library, you can do what you want. Maybe on
one shelf, you put books with blue covers; on another, books you haven't
read; and on another, books whose smell reminds you of old friends. To
anyone else it seems chaotic, but to you it makes perfect sense. You can
find the book you need when you want to. Perception does the heavy
lifting for you, without the cognitive strain of having to work through
the rational system every time.

#### The meaning of numbers {#the-meaning-of-numbers .unnumbered}

For the most part the use of numbers in Buddhist texts is entirely
pragmatic. Once you know that a set has a certain number of items, you
can tell if you've forgotten something.

Yet numbers have always been imbued with a significance and meaning that
transcends mere accounting. They allow us to make sense of a complex
cosmos through a simple set of conventions. Numbers are used in Buddhism
to provoke awe, even fear, at the "astronomical" scope of
transmigration. Is it possible that the symbolic meaning of numbers
lends a sense of unity to the various *[nipātas]{lang="sa"}*?

Symbolic meaning is, by its very nature, impossible to pin down with
precision. Unlike rational definition, it does not serve to limit the
scope of meaning but to amplify it through suggestion, hints, and
connotations. The symbolic meaning of numbers has, so far as I know,
mostly been ignored in Buddhist studies. Some numerological observations
were made in the number entries in the Rhys Davids' and Stede's
*Pali-English Dictionary*, but I am aware of little since then. However,
we can make a few general observations.

One

:   The number of harmony, simplicity, and supremacy. It is especially
    emphasized in the context of deep meditation (*[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*
    or *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}*). However, unlike many spiritual contexts,
    in Buddhism it never has a metaphysical sense: [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}
    is zero, not one; it is emptiness, not unity.

Two

:   Used for pairs, which may be partners---hands, eyes, man and
    wife---opponents---good vs. evil, light vs. dark, pain vs.
    pleasure---or successors---skill in entering meditation and skill in
    leaving it. It represents the dualities of the world.

Three

:   Made up of 2 + 1. It adds an extra, often spiritual, dimension to
    the worldly dualism of two. This is quite explicit in such sets as
    "gratification, drawback, and escape", and more subtly in, say,
    pleasant, painful, and neutral feelings. Three represents the
    *other*; and it is the other which contains the seed of
    transcendence.

Four

:   The most characteristic number of Buddhism, and the Book of the
    Fours is the largest of the *[nipātas]{lang="sa"}*. Its primary
    metaphor is the four quarters, and thus connotes totality and
    balance, most obviously in the four noble truths. Multiples of four
    have the same meaning at a higher order. Ten is similar, in that it
    is derived from the four quarters, the four intermediate quarters,
    and above and below.

Five

:   Stems from the hand, which is what we use to count; hence it divides
    into 4 + 1 (fingers and thumb) rather than 2 + 3. The most obvious
    example of this is the five "grasping" aggregates, where
    consciousness stands against the other four. Likewise in, say, the
    five faculties and powers, wisdom is the "thumb".

Six

:   Takes as its root metaphor the body: four limbs, torso, and head.
    The general sense is a "large whole", and the most prominent set is
    the six sense fields.

Seven

:   An astronomical number, derived from the lunar cycles and the
    heavenly bodies (sun + moon + five visible planets). It is used
    especially commonly in myth, and has the general sense of "the
    entire cycle of life and death". It appears in this sense in the
    story of the Bodhisatta's birth.

I believe that we can indeed discern traces of these meanings in the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}, and offer some examples below. In some cases,
the texts of a certain number would have been simply imported into the
collection, while in other cases the text would have been edited
specifically to create the necessary numbered set. Either way, having
some sense of these meanings gives us a perspective through which to see
the *[nipātas]{lang="sa"}* as meaningful wholes.

With such general meanings, and doubtless many exceptions and
contradictions, it is not possible to establish beyond doubt that the
numbers of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} have a symbolic meaning. If you
dislike any attempt at reading symbolic meaning, I cannot prove you
wrong. But it does, I believe, give us an approach through which to
appreciate why the redactors dealt with their diverse and complex
material in this way.

#### Thematic clusters, segues, and arcs {#thematic-clusters-segues-and-arcs .unnumbered}

Despite its chaotic impression, suttas in the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} are
rarely isolated. Most of the time they appear in *thematic clusters*
that deal with the same topic. This might be just a pair of suttas,
though it's not uncommon to find an entire *vagga* on a specific theme.
These are often closely related suttas, simply varying a few details
from one to the next. Or they may have a loose thematic thread,
featuring, for example, the same person, or group of persons. In several
cases, *vaggas* of the same name and theme appear multiple times in the
collection.

Such thematic clusters are easy to recognize; but still, it often seems
as if there is nothing that connects one cluster with the next. However,
this is not always the case. Often the shift from one cluster to another
happens through what might be called a *thematic segue*. When moving
from one thematic cluster to the next, some common element is
maintained. This might be a topic, or simply some formal feature---a
question format, a word, a syntax, etc. Such hooks help smooth the
transition from cluster to cluster.

In such cases we find that there is some element in the first cluster
\[A\], which is combined with a second element \[AB\] to form a new
cluster or extend the old one. Then the second element is combined with
something else to make yet another cluster \[BC\]. And perhaps later the
second element is dropped altogether leaving just the third \[C\], or it
is recombined with something new. If you compare the first element \[A\]
with the third \[C\] there's nothing in common. Yet the progress from
one to the other is gradual. And the frequency with which this occurs
shows that it is by no means accidental.

Similar techniques are a stock in trade of musical composition. After
introducing a motif, the composer gradually transforms and develops it.
Eventually, they might arrive at a new motif, which shares nothing in
common with the original, but from which it evolved.

A thematic segue is often a purely formal technique that says little
about the subject matter. However, with careful attention we can see
that thematic clusters, chained together with segues, sometimes evolve
over larger spans of text to create a loosely organized *thematic arc*.
Such arcs echo teaching frameworks that are familiar from elsewhere,
such as the Gradual Training. This is used, for example, to inform the
shape of the first 75 suttas of the Book of the Ones. Such arcs are by
no means as clear and formally structured as the teachings on which they
are based. Yet the progress from one topic to the next is undeniable.

Indeed, each *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* can be seen as forming its own arc,
as they typically begin with basic practices, and end with realizing
[Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}. The repetition series that round out each
*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* also have their internal arc, leading towards the
highest qualities.

#### Spaced repetition {#spaced-repetition .unnumbered}

In the [Dīgha]{lang="sa"} and Majjhima [Nikāyas]{lang="sa"}, a student
would spend a fair period of time memorizing one specific text,
rehearsing it, and---if they are a good student---inquiring and
questioning about the meaning. Only when it was mastered would they move
on to the next. In the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"}, a student would learn
dozens, even hundreds of suttas on the same topic, sharing similar
passages and ideas, and often varying little one to the other. Such
suttas may be memorized quickly, and interpretive problems often arise
at the level of the topic rather than the individual text.

But memorizing long texts, or many texts on the same subject, can get
boring, for the mind is stimulated by variety and surprise. In the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}, a student would learn one or two suttas on a
topic, or maybe a few more, then something else, then back to the
original topic, then a third. Now, as we have seen, various features
help keep the sequence of texts straight. But perhaps there is something
more to it: perhaps the very randomness and repetition help them to
learn.

This is a lot like the modern technique known as "spaced repetition",
commonly used for language learning. A vocabulary of words is introduced
one at a time in a random sequence. After learning one word, one moves
on to another. But the first word is then re-introduced a little later
to reinforce learning. And so it goes, with the same words coming back
again and again. In terms of the sequence from one word to the next,
everything is random. But the overall pattern is carefully optimized to
reinforce and speed up memorization.

Perhaps we could think of it like a school. The [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} is
like a school *curriculum*: everything you need to know on a topic, all
in one place. But the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} is like a school *day*. One
class follows the other, and there is no real rhyme and reason to it.
Some things happen fairly regularly and predictably, while others seem
to just pop up at random. Despite its more chaotic nature, it works:
that's how we learn. No one would suggest that school subjects are best
mastered by first learning the science curriculum, then the maths, then
the history. Not only does the spaced repetition reinforce learning, but
it provokes us to see new and unexpected connections between things.

### The Book of the Ones {#the-book-of-the-ones .unnumbered}

I have suggested that the number one carries with it a specific set of
connotations, notably harmony, simplicity, and supremacy. If this is
framed as an overall theme, it might be something like this: keep your
spiritual practice simple and focused to help your mind attain deep
immersion, and in that way, you can realize the supreme Dhamma. Let us
see how the Book of the Ones exemplifies these attributes.

The Book of the Ones is a rather special case in that virtually the
entire *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* is constructed from fragments and
templates. The collection begins with the striking assertion that no
sight occupies a man's mind like that of a woman, or a woman's mind like
that of a man. The remainder of the exterior senses are listed for each
gender binary, making ten suttas in all for the first *vagga*. This very
much has the appearance of a single sutta divided into ten. In the Fives
([AN 5.55](https://suttacentral.net/an5.55)) we find a similar set of
statements given in a particular context, dealing with the masculine
perspective only. And in the Chinese, we find that the parallels at EA
9.7 and EA 9.8 fit the two halves of this *vagga*. This supports the
idea that these texts were originally combined to form a single sutta,
or perhaps a pair of suttas.

An even clearer example of this is provided by the three pairs of suttas
at [AN 1.76](https://suttacentral.net/an1.76) to [AN
1.81](https://suttacentral.net/an1.81). Each of the pairs follows the
same pattern, exemplified by the first pair. [AN
1.76](https://suttacentral.net/an1.76) says that the loss of relatives
is a small thing, while wisdom is the worst thing to lose. [AN
1.77](https://suttacentral.net/an1.77) presents the inverse: growth of
relatives is a small thing, for wisdom is the best thing to grow. But it
continues to round off the sutta by urging the mendicants to train to
grow in wisdom. This conclusion is lacking in the first of the pair and
is a clear sign that the text has been divided.

One should not conclude from this that the text has been assembled
haphazardly. On the contrary, we can identify a series of arcs that bind
long series of suttas together. The opening chapters are designed to
show the development of meditation, echoing the meditator's progress in
the Gradual Training.

- The first chapter, as we have seen already, deals with the restraint
  of sexuality, one of the foundations of meditation.

- The second chapter deals with the hindrances which must be abandoned
  before entering deep meditation. This is linked via a thematic segue
  from the previous chapter, the link being the phrase "I do not see a
  single thing".

- The third and fourth chapters deal with the advantages of the
  developed mind, which has been purified through the process of
  meditation: nothing brings greater happiness and benefit. They
  continue using the phrase "I do not see a single thing".

- The fifth chapter abandons the phrase "I do not see a single thing".
  Here the thematic segue is the topic of "mind" (*citta*) and its
  development.

- The fifth chapter ends with two discourses that mention the famous
  "radiant mind". These are fragments, and a more complete statement is
  found in the following suttas that start the next chapter. It is
  somewhat unusual to find such closely connected suttas broken over a
  *vagga* boundary like this. Note that the "radiant mind" is not a
  metaphysical term, and neither here nor anywhere else in the early
  Buddhist texts is the mind said to be "intrinsically" or "naturally"
  or "originally" radiant or luminous. On the contrary, the mind is
  conditioned and hence is not "intrinsically" anything at all. The
  radiant mind is simply a way of talking about meditative absorption or
  *[jhāna]{lang="sa"}*.

- The sixth chapter continues on the theme of absorption. However, it
  changes theme at [AN 1.56](https://suttacentral.net/an1.56)---though
  maintaining focus on "mind"---and continues by addressing the
  causality of good and bad qualities. In context, these can be
  understood as pertaining to the wisdom portion of meditation, as
  treated in the fourth of the *[satipaṭṭhānas]{lang="sa"}*. This series
  culminates at [AN 1.75](https://suttacentral.net/an1.75) with the
  perfection of the awakening factors, thus signifying the completion of
  the path.

A structure such as this is particularly telling as it reveals the
intent of the redactors. This thematic arc spanning 75 fragmentary
suttas does not exist in the sources at all: it is purely implied by the
choices of the redactors. Their method was to reduce the statements of
the Dhamma to their simplest meaningful elements, then reassemble them
according to the principles of the Dhamma as they understood them.

And the redactors were even more subtle than that. For not only are
these fragments assembled to form a coherent whole, but the choice of
theme was quite deliberate. Of all the doctrinal contexts in Buddhism,
it is *[samādhi]{lang="sa"}* or "unification of mind" where the number
one is most prominent. In starting with the Ones, the redactors were
sensitive to the use of numbers in the canon, and arranged their texts
to bring the most important "one" to the fore.

From here, the text shifts focus. As noted above, [AN
1.76--81](https://suttacentral.net/an1.71-81) deals with pairs of gain
and loss. Then from [AN 1.82](https://suttacentral.net/an1.82-97) we
have a series of texts on those things that are harmful and beneficial,
starting with the pair of negligence and diligence. While these
teachings are of course common throughout the canon, it is fitting that
they appear here to represent the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}'s special focus
on the fundamentals of a good life. Here they exemplify the aspect of
*simplicity*, helping a student to focus on just one aspect of Dhamma at
a time.

The same set of factors is treated a few times with slightly varying
templates, the final of which says that each of these harmful things
leads to the disappearance of Buddhism, while the good things lead to
its continuation. This leads us up to [AN
1.129](https://suttacentral.net/an1.98-139).

From [AN 1.130--169](https://suttacentral.net/an1.98-139), the topic of
the preservation of the Dhamma is continued, but applied to a new theme,
one that is quite distinctive of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}: teaching
the Dhamma. Specifically, those who present the Dhamma accurately make
much merit and preserve Buddhism, while those who distort or
misrepresent the Dhamma make bad karma and destroy Buddhism. This series
of texts displays its inner structure, as it begins with simply the
"teaching" and then continues to differentiate the Dhamma more and more
finely, especially with the introduction of the Vinaya and a rather
extensive list of technical terms for monastic discipline. It does not
take much to see that an originally simple statement could have been
drawn out by adding multiple aspects of the teaching, conveniently
giving the students of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} some Vinaya material
to learn.

This series of suttas grows out of the former, with the theme of
preserving Buddhism as the thematic segue. Thus we have, from [AN
1.82](https://suttacentral.net/an1.82-97) through [AN
1.169](https://suttacentral.net/an1.150-169), a second thematic arc
consisting of 88 suttas.

From [AN 1.170](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187) a new theme is
introduced, one that also represents a key aspect of the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}: persons. Buddhism is, of course, most famous for
its teachings on not-self, and its impersonal analysis of psychological
processes. But there is plenty of material throughout the suttas that
deals with persons, or character types, and much of that is in the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}. These texts were later assembled to form the
Abhidhamma text the [Puggalapaññatti]{lang="sa"}, the "Description of
Persons".

Of all the persons in Buddhism, the incomparable one is the Buddha
himself. While there is a series of Buddhas over the ages, in our age he
is unique. Hence these suttas speak of the "one person" who arises in
the world who is uniquely beneficial and transcendent. At [AN
1.187](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187) the Buddha's chief
disciple, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, is praised as the one who continues to
roll the wheel of Dhamma after the Buddha. This segues into the next
series of suttas, which single out individual followers of the Buddha
for particular praise. This is a rather fascinating list, in which
appear many characters from all over the canon; not only the four
*[nikāyas]{lang="sa"}*, but the Vinaya and the Khuddaka as well.
Prominent monks appear in [AN
1.188--234](https://suttacentral.net/an1.188-197); nuns from [AN
1.235--247](https://suttacentral.net/an1.235-247); laymen from [AN
1.248--257](https://suttacentral.net/an1.248-257); and laywomen, from
[AN 1.258--267](https://suttacentral.net/an1.258-267). All of these
people are "number one" in their field, exemplifying the sense of "one"
as *supremacy*.

The next chapter continues the theme of "persons", enumerating various
things that are possible or impossible for various people. For example,
it is impossible for one "attained to view"---that is, a
stream-enterer---to take any condition as permanent. But from [AN
1.284--295](https://suttacentral.net/an1.278-286), once again we find a
thematic segue; the "person" vanishes and the theme of possible and
impossible is applied rather on an impersonal level: good things cannot
come from bad deeds.

This makes up the third great thematic arc in the Ones, 126 suttas from
[AN 1.170](https://suttacentral.net/an1.170-187) to [AN
1.295](https://suttacentral.net/an1.287-295). The remainder of the Ones
continues similarly, with fragmented suttas assembled along loose
thematic lines. The themes remain similar, with one difference. As the
Book draws closer to its end, the subject of [Nibbāna]{lang="sa"}, the
final goal of Buddhism, becomes ever more prominent. The final *vagga*
is called the "Chapter on the Deathless", and it deals directly with the
path to full awakening. Thus the sense of thematic unity that has been
evident in multiple sections of the Book of the Ones is also evident in
its overall structure, assembled by the redactors to culminate in
awakening.

### The Book of the Twos {#the-book-of-the-twos .unnumbered}

The second *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* is a kind of bridge between the "arcs
of fragments" that characterize the first *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* and the
more complete suttas that become prominent in the remainder of the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}. It echoes and amplifies the themes of the first
*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*, while also introducing new ideas.

It begins with a series of suttas that speak of the fundamental
principles of the good life: doing good and avoiding bad ([AN
2.3--4](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10)) and the results of deeds in
this life and the next ([AN 2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10)).
This, I think, announces what the redactors aimed to be the chief theme
of this *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*: the idea that there is a moral order in
the world, there is good and evil, and if we comprehend this we can live
our life well. The collection starts by emphasizing this fact, and the
dire consequences of ignoring it.

The second chapter builds on this, speaking on the "power of reflection"
to look back and understand this moral order, and the "power of
development" to move on from the bad and develop the good ([AN
2.11--13](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20)). A specific example of
this is given in the case of a disciplinary measure within the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ([AN 2.15](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20); cp.
[AN 2.21](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31)). When one mendicant
accuses another of wrongdoing, both should "reflect" on what happened
and their role in the affair, and only then can the issue be properly
healed and everyone move on. This chapter also details in various
respects the way that good and bad deeds lead to various results ([AN
2.16](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20), [AN
2.17](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20)), spelling out a series of
results that pertain both to this life and the next ([AN
2.18](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20)). The Buddha then introduces
the idea of a deliberate practice: one should not only recognize these
things and reflect on them within oneself but develop the good and give
up the bad, for it is possible to do so ([AN
2.19](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20)).

These suttas (and others) build on the teachings found in the first
*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* that deal with basic principles. They conclude the
opening arc that establishes the theme of this *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*:
the worldly duality of good and bad, which creates both a responsibility
and an opportunity to respond.

But it should not be thought that these chapters are fully coherent and
systematic. One finds the occasional sutta that appears quite random,
for example [AN 2.10](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10) on entering the
rainy season retreat; or [AN 2.60](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63)
on why fauns (*kimpurisa*) do not use human speech.

Meanwhile, distinct themes from the first *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* are also
introduced, mixed up without clear order. [AN
2.14](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20) mentions two ways of teaching
Dhamma---in brief and in detail---while [AN
2.20](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20) says that the survival of
Buddhism depends on getting both the meaning and the phrasing of the
texts correct (also see [AN 2.41](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41)).
[AN 2.23](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31) reprises the theme that
one who distorts the teaching misrepresents the Buddha and contributes
to the ending of Buddhism. This applies to those who claim that things
were spoken by the Buddha when they were not.

[AN 2.24](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31) introduces the contrast
between the discourses that require interpretation (*neyyattha*) and
those whose meaning is explicit (*[nītattha]{lang="sa"}*). In some
suttas (eg. [MN 133](https://suttacentral.net/mn133)), we find that the
Buddha gives a brief statement which the mendicants do not understand,
so they seek advice on how to interpret it. In other cases a verse or
doctrinal statement is unclear and the mendicants discuss it. These
examples show that the process of discussion and analysis of the
Buddha's teaching was underway from the very beginning. This process was
eventually to be formalized as the various sets of Abhidhamma texts and
spelled out in the commentaries. But these later texts did not yet
exist, and should not be read back into the suttas.

[AN 2.31](https://suttacentral.net/an2.21-31) reintroduces another of
the themes of the first *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*: meditation. The pair of
serenity (*samatha*) and discernment (or "insight",
*[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}*) are said to play a part in realization:
serenity develops the mind, while *[vipassanā]{lang="sa"}* develops
wisdom. Together they lead to the two aspects of awakening: the freedom
of heart and the freedom by wisdom.

But this is, for the moment, an isolated text, for the next series of
texts returns to the theme of persons. This theme was briefly introduced
earlier, when [AN 2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10) contrasted the
efforts of lay folk and renunciants. [AN
2.32](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41) says that a good person knows
gratitude, while the bad one does not. [AN
2.33](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41) speaks of the strongest and
most emotional ties of gratitude, those of a child to their parents. The
Buddha says that even by carrying your parents around for the rest of
their lives, feeding and cleaning them, you cannot repay them the gift
of life. Only by establishing them in the principles of the Dhamma can
you repay them. The theme of respect for parents is further developed in
[AN 3.31](https://suttacentral.net/an3.31).

In [AN 2.35](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41) the Buddha tells a
brahmin that the traditional religious donation
(*[dakkhiṇa]{lang="sa"}*) is owed to those who are purified, that is,
the trainee and master on the path. These replace the sacrifice of the
brahmins. Next follow some teachings by disciples, in which both
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} ([AN 2.36](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41))
and [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} ([AN
2.38](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41)) make a distinction between
inner and outer practice, while [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} makes a shrewd
observation: householders argue about sensual pleasures, but renunciants
argue over views ([AN 2.37](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41)). In [AN
2.39](https://suttacentral.net/an2.32-41) the Buddha makes a rather
biting comparison between a kingdom overrun with bandits and a
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} where the good mendicants are weak, cowed into
silence. The following chapter ([AN
2.42--51](https://suttacentral.net/an2.42-51)) expands on this by
contrasting good and bad assemblies.

From assemblies as groups of people, the text revisits yet another theme
of the first *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*: the Buddha as the supreme person.
Here he is paired with his worldly counterpart, the wheel-turning
emperor ([AN 2.52--55](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63)). Continuing
with the theme of kinds of people, [AN
2.62](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63) and [AN
2.63](https://suttacentral.net/an2.52-63) describe procedures in the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} for settling disputes and living harmoniously.

The next chapter is tightly constructed on the subject of happiness
(*sukha*). It introduces the topic by contrasting the happiness of lay
people and that of renunciants, of which the latter is better ([AN
2.64](https://suttacentral.net/an2.64-76)). This continues the theme of
persons, specifically the contrast between lay folk and renunciants,
which was already stated in the second text of the
*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*. Here it is combined with the topic of happiness,
which is new. A series of suttas expands on this theme, but it uses a
thematic segue to move away from the focus on "persons" and speak of
happiness in purely psychological terms more reminiscent of the
[Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"}.

This chapter itself forms another segue---a nested segue if you
will---to the next series of chapters, the unifying characteristic being
the tight integration of short suttas on a single pattern in a *vagga*,
returning to the kind of "vagga as sutta" that we saw in the Book of the
Ones. Chapter 8 deals with the causes for good and bad qualities;
Chapter 9 deals with various miscellaneous pairs of "things"
(*[dhammā]{lang="sa"}*); Chapter 10 deals with the contrast between the
fool and the astute; and Chapter 11, while a little more diverse, caps
off this series.

[AN 2.130](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140)--[AN
2.133](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140) eulogize great disciples,
reminding us of the lists of the foremost disciples in the Book of the
Ones. A few discourses then revisit the theme of good and bad people
inheriting the results of their deeds ([AN
2.134](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140)--[AN
2.137](https://suttacentral.net/an2.130-140)). The remainder of the
*[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* lists a long series of pairs of contrasted
qualities. Particularly interesting is the series at [AN
2.280--309](https://suttacentral.net/an2.280-309) where the Buddha gives
the reasons for laying down rules for monastics. Normally this is a list
of ten reasons, but here they are arranged as pairs. The final series
speaks of developing deep understanding and letting go through the pair
of serenity and discernment. Thus, despite its main focus on worldly
ethics and results, the second *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*, like the first,
ends with the practices leading to awakening.

### The Book of the Threes {#the-book-of-the-threes .unnumbered}

With this book we move on from the fragmentary assemblages of the Book
of the Ones and partly the Book of the Twos, and find more
conventionally unified suttas. Of course, this is never an absolute, as
all the books of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} retain extensive repetition
series. Still, the focus from now is clearly on the whole sutta; and as
a consequence, the hand of the redactors is harder to discern.

That does not mean, however, that there is a dramatic break from the
first books. On the contrary, the Book of the Threes begins with a
thematic *vagga* that focuses on the familiar contrasting pair of the
fool and the astute. The number three is represented in the qualities
that are said to characterize them. The [Bālavagga]{lang="sa"} (Chapter
on the Fool) corresponds to the similarly-named third and tenth chapters
of the Twos, as well as the second chapter of the Fives.

Like the Books of the Ones and Twos, this *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}* begins
by emphasizing the problematic situation that we are in, the tensions
and struggles of our worldly situation. The second *vagga* shifts focus
to what we can do about it.

Thus in [AN 3.13](https://suttacentral.net/an3.13) we first see a clear
example of the number three as a worldly binary and a transcendent
dimension that resolves the contradiction. This sutta speaks of one
without hope---someone afflicted by poverty and misery of station, as
well as illness of body---and a hopeful person, who looks to a bright
future. But then there is the one who has done away with hope: since
they have achieved their goal, there is nothing to look forward to.

[AN 3.14](https://suttacentral.net/an3.14) makes an important political
point: even the greatest of rulers are subject to the rule of law
(*dhamma*). Here the relevant group of three is action by body, speech,
and mind. This triad---which is pre-Buddhist---expresses one of the
fundamental principles of the Dhamma, the focus on ethical choices and
good deeds. It is found constantly throughout the Threes. Whereas a
worldly philosophy might take into consideration only a person's
external acts of body and speech, for Buddhism the mind is always the
most important. It is the mind that is ultimately responsible for what
we do and say, and it is through the mind that freedom is found. Thus
the mind here points to the transcendent dimension of escape.

The next discourse continues with the threefold division of body,
speech, and mind, giving some practical advice as to how to work for
their proper development. For the first time the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}
ventures into narrative. It tells the story of a chariot maker of the
past, who was commissioned by the king to make a new war chariot for a
battle in six months. This is a rather striking setup: the scale of
society is so small that it is unremarkable for a king to personally
speak to a chariot-maker. And apparently, a single chariot is an
adequate military build-up for war; a war that is, politely enough,
scheduled precisely six months in advance. The small scale and low
stakes of this charming story are a strong contrast with the elaborate
and fanciful legends of the [Dīgha]{lang="sa"}.

The chariot-maker completes the first wheel only six days before the
battle and is urged to rush the second one. But time matters: the first
wheel is well-formed and stable, while the second wobbles and crashes.
The Buddha then goes on to identify himself as the chariot-maker. This
too is remarkable, as it is one of the very few [Jātaka]{lang="sa"}
stories in the four *[nikāyas]{lang="sa"}*. The Buddha-to-be's humble
station as a lowly chariot-maker is unusual, as usually he is said to be
a great king of the past. It's also noteworthy that his commission is
morally dubious: he is an arms manufacturer. Later the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} will say that trade in arms is one of the forms
of wrong livelihood ([AN 5.177](https://suttacentral.net/an5.177)). One
might argue that a chariot is not a weapon, but it is explicitly
required as a war vehicle, and today we would not hesitate to count,
say, tanks or fighter jets as weapons platforms. In the later
[Jātaka]{lang="sa"} collection, it is not unusual for the Bodhisatta to
break precepts or commit various acts of dubious morality; after all,
the whole point is that he is not yet perfect. Still, this adds to the
striking impression of this little tale, so much more down to earth and
realistic than the other [Jātakas]{lang="sa"} in the
*[nikāyas]{lang="sa"}*.

[AN 3.16](https://suttacentral.net/an3.16) introduces the idea of the
"guaranteed practice", which consists of three of the elements of the
Gradual Training: sense restraint, eating in moderation, and
wakefulness. These implicitly call back to the very first chapter of the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}, here presented in a more standard form.

One of the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}'s characteristic rhetorical devices is
to contrast the worldly with the sacred; remember how [AN
2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an2.1-10) spoke of the efforts of the lay
and the renunciant. [AN 3.19](https://suttacentral.net/an3.19) expands
this theme, comparing a shopkeeper who must work morning, noon, and
night with a mendicant who applies themselves to their meditation
morning, noon, and night. [AN 3.20](https://suttacentral.net/an3.20)
applies the same metaphor in a different way. These suttas cap off the
first arc, which deals with understanding the dangers of the world, and
working to escape from it.

The third chapter revisits the theme of "persons". It begins with a
discussion among some senior mendicants regarding who is best out of
three kinds of spiritually attained person; or in other words, who has
best implemented the practice encouraged in the first two chapters ([AN
3.21](https://suttacentral.net/an3.21)). An interesting comparison is
made between the treatment of illness and providing spiritual
assistance: you can't always help, but you should at least try ([AN
3.22](https://suttacentral.net/an3.22)).

Several suttas in the Threes share a pattern where the first item is a
foundation, the second is the realization of the four noble truths, and
the third is full awakening. This first appears at [AN
3.12](https://suttacentral.net/an3.12), and is applied in different ways
in [AN 3.24](https://suttacentral.net/an3.24) and [AN
3.25](https://suttacentral.net/an3.25).

Returning to the theme of meditative immersion with which the entire
collection started, we are introduced to an intriguing teaching that
reappears multiple times in the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}, but nowhere else
in the canon ([AN 3.32](https://suttacentral.net/an3.32), [AN
10.6](https://suttacentral.net/an10.6), [AN
10.7](https://suttacentral.net/an10.7), [AN
11.7](https://suttacentral.net/an11.7), [AN
11.18](https://suttacentral.net/an11.18)--[AN
11.21](https://suttacentral.net/an11.21)). It begins with a question:
could it be that a mendicant might attain a state of immersion that is
free of all ego and conceit? Normally it is understood that the
meditative absorptions are shared between ordinary people and
enlightened beings on the path. The perfected ones are distinguished by
having let go the cause of suffering, not because they have attained
some special state of meditation. But these suttas, with their striking
note of wonder, imply that there is a special meditative state attained
only by the perfected ones.

This discourse is also distinguished by the fact that it finishes by
quoting a verse currently included in the Sutta [Nipāta]{lang="sa"} and
even correctly names the chapter, the "The Way to the Beyond". It is not
at all obvious that the verse was originally intended to refer to a
state of meditation. This shows that free and imaginative readings of
suttas were found even in the earliest times.

The next discourse ([AN 3.33](https://suttacentral.net/an3.33))
continues with the theme of going beyond ego and conceit, and it too
quotes from "The Way to the Beyond". But it starts with the Buddha in
what appears to be an uncharacteristically despondent mood, saying that
whether he teaches in brief or in detail---harking back to [AN
2.14](https://suttacentral.net/an2.11-20)---it's hard to find anyone who
understands.

[AN 3.35](https://suttacentral.net/an3.35) narrates a personal encounter
with a fellow by the name of Hatthaka, who came across the Buddha
meditating near his hometown of [Āḷavī]{lang="sa"}. He asks if the
Buddha slept well, considering the harshness of his outdoor living. The
Buddha replies that he is one of those who sleep well in the world, as
he is rid of the greed, hate, and delusion that disturb people in their
sleep.

This is the second time this classic triad appears in the Threes. They
first appeared in the previous sutta, [AN
3.34](https://suttacentral.net/an3.34), as the source of deeds, and will
recur in this sense in multiple suttas in this *[nipāta]{lang="sa"}*.
Like the triad of body, speech, and mind, they can be seen to exemplify
the 2 + 1 pattern. Greed and hate are a codependent pair, the ugly
opposites. Delusion underlies them both; but at the same time, the
counterpart of delusion is wisdom, and it is through wisdom that
transcendence is possible.

This narrative mood ventures into mythology in the next discourse, which
gives the Buddhist account of the god Yama, lord of the dead. While one
might expect a death god to be fearsome, here he takes a decidedly
Buddhist approach to the afterlife. When the departed are brought to
Yama, he neither judges nor punishes. Rather, he asks the departed
whether he took heed of the messengers sent by the gods: an old person,
a sick person, and a corpse. These, of course, are three of the four
divine messengers seen by the Bodhisattva before he went forth
(canonically found in the life of [Vipassī]{lang="sa"}; see [DN
14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14)). When the departed one replies that
he took no heed, Yama castigates him for his negligence and then falls
silent. The departed is dragged off to endure the sufferings of hell,
here recounted in a briefer form than [MN
129](https://suttacentral.net/mn129) and [MN
130](https://suttacentral.net/mn130). Yama goes on to lament the pitiful
state of mortals, including himself and wishes he could be reborn as a
human and practice Buddhism.

The mythological mood continues in the next couple of suttas ([AN
3.37](https://suttacentral.net/an3.37), [AN
3.38](https://suttacentral.net/an3.38)), which introduce a new topic
that will be very important for the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}; namely, the
*uposatha* or "sabbath". This was a special "holy day" for religious
observance observed weekly or on certain special days. The ministers of
the Four Great Kings survey the earth on such days to see if people are
honoring their betters and doing good. If they are, they rejoice, for
they know that such people will be reborn in heaven to swell the hosts
of the gods, whereas if they are not they fear the hosts of the demons
will increase. This will of course have serious military implications in
the ongoing war between the two.

The next couple of suttas deal with renunciation, first as the Buddha's
recollection of his delicate upbringing ([AN
3.39](https://suttacentral.net/an3.39)), then as a reflection for how a
renunciate is to reflect with integrity on their choices ([AN
3.40](https://suttacentral.net/an3.40)). [AN
3.41](https://suttacentral.net/an3.41) and [AN
3.42](https://suttacentral.net/an3.42) look at the other side of the
coin, the qualities that make merit for a lay donor, especially faith
and generosity as well as the desire to learn. Learning is taken up as
the theme of the next two suttas ([AN
3.43](https://suttacentral.net/an3.43) and [AN
3.44](https://suttacentral.net/an3.44)). Then the themes of generosity,
faith, and the worthy spiritual life that make merit fruitful are
revisited ([AN 3.45](https://suttacentral.net/an3.45), [AN
3.46](https://suttacentral.net/an3.46), [AN
3.48](https://suttacentral.net/an3.48)). Mendicants are then urged to be
diligent ([AN 3.49](https://suttacentral.net/an3.49)) and the nature of
bad mendicants is disclosed ([AN
3.50](https://suttacentral.net/an3.50)). Taken together, this series of
12 suttas can be read as a small thematic arc on the relation between
lay folk and renunciants, the need for both to have integrity and the
proper sense of values in their sphere, and the mutual support of each
other through generosity with material things and of teachings.

Next begins a new *vagga*, "On Brahmins", which as one might expect,
depicts the Buddha in conversation with brahmins. In [AN
3.51](https://suttacentral.net/an3.51) and [AN
3.52](https://suttacentral.net/an3.52), the Buddha is approached by two
brahmins, who confess that they have not lived a good life, and now, in
their dotage, seek for help. The Buddha acknowledges the brevity of life
and urges restraint of body, speech, and mind. [AN
3.53](https://suttacentral.net/an3.53) has the Buddha speaking to
another brahmin on how the Dhamma is to be realized in this very life.
He gives a similar teaching to a wanderer ([AN
3.54](https://suttacentral.net/an3.54)) and to the brahmin
[Jāṇussoṇi]{lang="sa"} ([AN 3.55](https://suttacentral.net/an3.55)).
That the Buddha's teaching may be realized in this life is a stock
characteristic of the Dhamma (*[sandiṭṭhiko]{lang="sa"}
[akāliko]{lang="sa"}*), but it is easy to overlook how directly this was
a rebuke of pre-existing religious traditions. They looked forward to
rewards in the future---whether a heavenly rebirth or the eventual
annihilation of suffering---but the Buddha, while not denying the
reality and importance of future fruits, refocused spiritual life on the
present.

[AN 3.56](https://suttacentral.net/an3.56) gives a different kind of
teaching to a brahmin. In a message with a special poignancy in our
troubled times, the Buddha explains why civilizations collapse, namely,
unbridled greed. In [AN 3.57](https://suttacentral.net/an3.57) the
Buddha refutes the wanderer Vacchagotta's accusation that he only
encourages giving to his followers. When the brahmin
[Tikaṇṇa]{lang="sa"} ("Three-ear") praises true brahmins, the Buddha
responds with his redefinition of a brahmin, rejecting the value of
birth and Vedic learning, and giving the second part of the Gradual
Training, starting with the absorptions ([AN
3.58](https://suttacentral.net/an3.58); [AN
3.59](https://suttacentral.net/an3.59) is similar). In [AN
3.60](https://suttacentral.net/an3.60), the Buddha not only rejects the
value of the Vedic sacrifice, but he also shows that by teaching Dhamma
one can benefit many more people.

The seventh *vagga* is titled the "Great Chapter", and it introduces a
series of discourses on a larger scale. It begins with a thematic segue;
[AN 3.61](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61) continues the theme of the
relation between Buddhist and non-Buddhist theories, but it does so as a
straight doctrinal discourse to the mendicants, rather than as an
interfaith dialogue. This magnificent discourse offers an important
framing of dependent origination and it deserves detailed study. This
Great Chapter is unified by the length of the sutta rather than by
subject; however several other suttas deal with non-Buddhist philosophy
and relations ([AN 3.64](https://suttacentral.net/an3.64), [AN
3.68](https://suttacentral.net/an3.68), [AN
3.70](https://suttacentral.net/an3.70)), including the famous
[Kālāma]{lang="sa"} Sutta ([AN 3.65](https://suttacentral.net/an3.65);
also [AN 3.66](https://suttacentral.net/an3.66)).

Here I will end my analysis, as I think enough examples have been given
to illustrate both the connectedness and the chaos of this collection.
Hopefully, the reader can find their way from here, and not feel so
bewildered by the sudden shifts and changes they encounter.

### A Brief Textual History {#a-brief-textual-history .unnumbered}

The [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} was edited by R. Morris
(vols. 1 and 2) and E. Hardy (vols 3--5) based on manuscripts in
Sinhalese and Burmese scripts; Hardy also made use of the then
recently-published royal Thai edition. It was published in Latin script
by the Pali Text Society from 1885 to 1900. Indexes by M. Hunt and Mrs.
C.A.F. Rhys Davids were added in 1910. The first translation followed in
1932--36 by F.L. Woodward (vols. 1, 2, and 5) and E.M. Hare (vols. 3 and
4) under the title *The Book of the Gradual Sayings*.

As was the case with the Majjhima and [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"}, several
disparate individual suttas from the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} were
published in book form or the web. However, a complete new translation
had to wait for Bhikkhu Bodhi to complete his work on the
[Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}. As described in the
introduction to his translation, in the late 1990s Bhikkhu Bodhi
collected Nyanaponika Thera's four-part series of Wheel booklets into a
single volume for the International Sacred Literature Trust as *An
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} Anthology*. He then added
sixty more suttas and published a total of 208 suttas as *The Numerical
Discourses of the Buddha: An Anthology of Suttas from the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} [Nikāya]{lang="sa"}* with AltaMira Press in 1999.
In 2012 he completed the full translation, which was published as *The
Numerical Discourses of the Buddha* through Wisdom Publications. His
Introduction was even more extensive than his previous works; less
technical than the [Saṁyutta]{lang="sa"} introduction, the bulk of it
focused on an overview of the teachings found in the
[Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"}. As with his previous translations, this work
constituted a major leap forward in accuracy and readability,
introducing the [Aṅguttara]{lang="sa"} to a new generation.

Where the Pali was unclear I frequently referred to the earlier work of
Bodhi, and rarely to Woodward/Hare and various translations of specific
texts. An article by Tse-fu Kuan ()---*Some Reflections on Translating
the Pali Texts: Literary Conventions, Buddhist Thought, Cultural
Background and Textual History*, 2019, Acta Orientalia Academiae
Scientiarum Hungaricae, vol. 72 (1), pp. 1--23---provided helpful
corrections in several passages.

## Acknowledgements {#acknowledgements .unnumbered}

I remember with gratitude all those from whom I have learned the Dhamma,
especially Ajahn Brahm and Bhikkhu Bodhi, the two monks who more than
anyone else showed me the depth, meaning, and practical value of the
Suttas.

Special thanks to Dustin and Keiko Cheah and family, who sponsored my
stay in Qi Mei while I made this translation.

Thanks also for Blake Walshe, who provided essential software support
for my translation work.

Throughout the process of translation, I have frequently sought feedback
and suggestions from the SuttaCentral community on our forum, "Discuss
and Discover". I want to thank all those who have made suggestions and
contributed to my understanding, as well as to the moderators who have
made the forum possible. These translations were significantly improved
due to the careful work of my proofreaders: [Ayyā]{lang="sa"}
[Pāsādā]{lang="sa"}, John and Lynn Kelly, and Derek Sola. Special thanks
are due to [Sabbamittā]{lang="sa"}, a true friend of all, who has
tirelessly and precisely checked my work.

Finally my everlasting thanks to all those people, far too many to
mention, who have supported SuttaCentral, and those who have supported
my life as a monastic. None of this would be possible without you.

# The Book of the Ones  {#the-book-of-the-ones-1 .unnumbered}

## The Chapter on What Occupies the Mind  {#the-chapter-on-what-occupies-the-mind .unnumbered}

### N 1.1--10 *Cittapariyādānavagga* {#n-1.110-cittapariyādānavagga .unnumbered}

#### 1  {#section .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a man's mind like
the sight of a woman. The sight of a woman occupies a man's mind."

#### 2  {#section-1 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a man's mind like
the sound of a woman. The sound of a woman occupies a man's mind."

#### 3  {#section-2 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a man's mind like
the smell of a woman. The smell of a woman occupies a man's mind."

#### 4  {#section-3 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a man's mind like
the taste of a woman. The taste of a woman occupies a man's mind."

#### 5  {#section-4 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a man's mind like
the touch of a woman. The touch of a woman occupies a man's mind."

#### 6  {#section-5 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sight that occupies a woman's mind
like the sight of a man. The sight of a man occupies a woman's mind."

#### 7  {#section-6 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single sound that occupies a woman's mind
like the sound of a man. The sound of a man occupies a woman's mind."

#### 8  {#section-7 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single smell that occupies a woman's mind
like the smell of a man. The smell of a man occupies a woman's mind."

#### 9  {#section-8 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single taste that occupies a woman's mind
like the taste of a man. The taste of a man occupies a woman's mind."

#### 10  {#section-9 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single touch that occupies a woman's mind
like the touch of a man. The touch of a man occupies a woman's mind."

## The Chapter on Giving Up the Hindrances  {#the-chapter-on-giving-up-the-hindrances .unnumbered}

### N 1.11--20 *Nīvaraṇappahānavagga* {#n-1.1120-nīvaraṇappahānavagga .unnumbered}

#### 11  {#section-10 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to sensual
desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the
feature of beauty. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature
of beauty, sensual desire arises, and once arisen it increases and
grows."

#### 12  {#section-11 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to ill will,
or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like the feature of
harshness. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of
harshness, ill will arises, and once arisen it increases and grows."

#### 13  {#section-12 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to dullness and
drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental
sluggishness. When you have a sluggish mind, dullness and drowsiness
arise, and once arisen they increase and grow."

#### 14  {#section-13 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to restlessness
and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow
like an unsettled mind. When you have no peace of mind, restlessness and
remorse arise, and once arisen they increase and grow."

#### 15  {#section-14 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to doubt, or,
when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow like irrational
application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally, doubt arises,
and once arisen it increases and grows."

#### 16  {#section-15 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents sensual desire
from arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the feature of
ugliness. When you apply the mind rationally to the feature of ugliness,
sensual desire does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it's given
up."

#### 17  {#section-16 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents ill will from
arising, or, when it has arisen, abandons it like the heart's release by
love. When you apply the mind rationally on the heart's release by love,
ill will does not arise, or, if it has already arisen, it's given up."

#### 18  {#section-17 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents dullness and
drowsiness from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like
the elements of initiative, persistence, and vigor. When you're
energetic, dullness and drowsiness do not arise, or, if they've already
arisen, they're given up."

#### 19  {#section-18 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents restlessness and
remorse from arising, or, when they have arisen, gives them up like
peace of mind. When your mind is peaceful, restlessness and remorse do
not arise, or, if they've already arisen, they're given up."

#### 20  {#section-19 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents doubt from
arising, or, when it has arisen, gives it up like rational application
of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, doubt does not arise, or,
if it's already arisen, it's given up."

## The Chapter on the Useless Mind  {#the-chapter-on-the-useless-mind .unnumbered}

### N 1.21--30 *Akammaniyavagga* {#n-1.2130-akammaniyavagga .unnumbered}

#### 21  {#section-20 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
like this, is as unworkable as the mind. An undeveloped mind is
unworkable."

#### 22  {#section-21 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like
this, is as workable as the mind. A developed mind is workable."

#### 23  {#section-22 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
like this, is so very harmful as the mind. An undeveloped mind is very
harmful."

#### 24  {#section-23 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed like
this, is so very beneficial as the mind. A developed mind is very
beneficial."

#### 25  {#section-24 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed,
with such untapped potential, is so very harmful as the mind. An
undeveloped mind, with untapped potential, is very harmful."

#### 26  {#section-25 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed,
with its potential realized, is so very beneficial as the mind. A
developed mind, with its potential realized, is very beneficial."

#### 27  {#section-26 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
and cultivated, is so very harmful as the mind. An undeveloped and
uncultivated mind is very harmful."

#### 28  {#section-27 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and
cultivated, is so very beneficial as the mind. A developed and
cultivated mind is very beneficial."

#### 29  {#section-28 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not developed
and cultivated, brings such suffering as the mind. An undeveloped and
uncultivated mind brings suffering."

#### 30  {#section-29 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is developed and
cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind. A developed and
cultivated mind brings happiness."

## The Chapter on the Wild Mind  {#the-chapter-on-the-wild-mind .unnumbered}

### N 1.31--40 *Adantavagga* {#n-1.3140-adantavagga .unnumbered}

#### 31  {#section-30 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not tamed, is
so very harmful as the mind. A wild mind is very harmful."

#### 32  {#section-31 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed, is so
very beneficial as the mind. A tamed mind is very beneficial."

#### 33  {#section-32 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not guarded, is
so very harmful as the mind. An unguarded mind is very harmful."

#### 34  {#section-33 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is guarded, is so
very beneficial as the mind. A guarded mind is very beneficial."

#### 35  {#section-34 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not protected,
is so very harmful as the mind. An unprotected mind is very harmful."

#### 36  {#section-35 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is protected, is
so very beneficial as the mind. A protected mind is very beneficial."

#### 37  {#section-36 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it's not restrained,
is so very harmful as the mind. An unrestrained mind is very harmful."

#### 38  {#section-37 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is restrained, is
so very beneficial as the mind. A restrained mind is very beneficial."

#### 39  {#section-38 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is not tamed,
guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very harmful as the mind. An
untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained mind is very harmful."

#### 40  {#section-39 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that, when it is tamed,
guarded, protected, and restrained, is so very beneficial as the mind. A
tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained mind is very beneficial."

## The Chapter on a Spike  {#the-chapter-on-a-spike .unnumbered}

### N 1.41--50 *Paṇihitaacchavagga* {#n-1.4150-paṇihitaacchavagga .unnumbered}

#### 41  {#section-40 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the wrong
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it is impossible for it to
break the skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is
pointing the wrong way. In the same way, it is quite impossible for a
mendicant whose mind is pointing the wrong way to break ignorance,
produce knowledge, and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because
their mind is pointing the wrong way."

#### 42  {#section-41 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, suppose a spike of rice or barley was pointing the right
way. If you trod on it with hand or foot, it's possible it may break the
skin and produce blood. Why is that? Because the spike is pointing the
right way. In the same way, it is quite possible for a mendicant whose
mind is pointing the right way to break ignorance, produce knowledge,
and realize extinguishment. Why is that? Because the mind is pointing
the right way."

#### 43  {#section-42 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
corrupted, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they
would be cast down to hell.' Why is that? Because their mind is
corrupted. Corruption of mind is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell."

#### 44  {#section-43 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when I've comprehended the mind of a person whose mind is
pure, I understand: 'If this person were to die right now, they would be
raised up to heaven.' Why is that? Because their mind is pure. Purity of
mind is the reason why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

#### 45  {#section-44 .unnumbered}

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was cloudy, murky, and
muddy. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would not see the
clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming
about or staying still. Why is that? Because the water is clouded. In
the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is clouded would know what's
for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that
they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones: this is quite impossible. Why is that? Because
their mind is clouded."

#### 46  {#section-45 .unnumbered}

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a lake that was transparent, clear, and
unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank would see the
clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming
about or staying still. Why is that? Because the water is unclouded. In
the same way, that a mendicant whose mind is not clouded would know
what's for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or
that they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones: this is quite possible. Why is that?
Because their mind is unclouded."

#### 47  {#section-46 .unnumbered}

"Just as, mendicants, the boxwood is said to be the best kind of tree in
terms of its pliability and workability, so too, I do not see a single
thing that's as pliable and workable as the mind, when it is developed
and cultivated. A mind that is developed and cultivated is pliable and
workable."

#### 48  {#section-47 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that's as quick to change as
the mind. So much so that it's not easy to give a simile for how quickly
the mind changes."

#### 49  {#section-48 .unnumbered}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. But it's corrupted by passing
corruptions."

#### 50  {#section-49 .unnumbered}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. And it is freed from passing
corruptions."

## The Chapter on a Finger-Snap  {#the-chapter-on-a-finger-snap .unnumbered}

### N 1.51--60 *Accharāsaṅghātavagga* {#n-1.5160-accharāsaṅghātavagga .unnumbered}

#### 51  {#section-50 .unnumbered}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. But it is corrupted by passing
corruptions. An unlearned ordinary person does not truly understand
this. So I say that the unlearned ordinary person has no development of
the mind."

#### 52  {#section-51 .unnumbered}

"This mind, mendicants, is radiant. And it is freed from passing
corruptions. A learned noble disciple truly understands this. So I say
that the learned noble disciple has development of the mind."

#### 53  {#section-52 .unnumbered}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant cultivates a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

#### 54  {#section-53 .unnumbered}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

#### 55  {#section-54 .unnumbered}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant focuses on a mind of love even as long as a
finger-snap, they're called a mendicant who does not lack absorption,
who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who
does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make
much of it!"

#### 56  {#section-55 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are
unskillful, part of the unskillful, on the side of the unskillful.
Intention is the first of those phenomena to arise, and unskillful
phenomena follow right behind."

#### 57  {#section-56 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, intention shapes all phenomena whatsoever that are
skillful, part of the skillful, on the side of the skillful. Intention
is the first of those phenomena to arise, and skillful phenomena follow
right behind."

#### 58  {#section-57 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like negligence. When
you're negligent, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

#### 59  {#section-58 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like diligence. When
you're diligent, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

#### 60  {#section-59 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like laziness. When
you're lazy, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

## The Chapter on Arousing Energy  {#the-chapter-on-arousing-energy .unnumbered}

### N 1.61--70 *Vīriyārambhādivagga* {#n-1.6170-vīriyārambhādivagga .unnumbered}

#### 61  {#section-60 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like arousing energy.
When you're energetic, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

#### 62  {#section-61 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like having many wishes.
When you have many wishes, unskillful qualities arise and skillful
qualities decline."

#### 63  {#section-62 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like having few wishes.
When you have few wishes, skillful qualities arise and unskillful
qualities decline."

#### 64  {#section-63 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of contentment.
When you lack contentment, unskillful qualities arise and skillful
qualities decline."

#### 65  {#section-64 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like contentment. When
you're contented, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

#### 66  {#section-65 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like irrational
application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally, unskillful
qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

#### 67  {#section-66 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like rational
application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, skillful
qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline."

#### 68  {#section-67 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like lack of situational
awareness. When you lack situational awareness, unskillful qualities
arise and skillful qualities decline."

#### 69  {#section-68 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like situational
awareness. When you have situational awareness, skillful qualities arise
and unskillful qualities decline."

#### 70  {#section-69 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like bad friends. When
you have bad friends, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

## The Chapter on Good Friends  {#the-chapter-on-good-friends .unnumbered}

### N 1.71--81 *Kalyāṇamittādivagga* {#n-1.7181-kalyāṇamittādivagga .unnumbered}

#### 71  {#section-70 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like good friends. When
you have good friends, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

#### 72  {#section-71 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like pursuing bad habits
and not good habits. When you pursue bad habits and not good habits,
unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities decline."

#### 73  {#section-72 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like pursuing good
habits and not bad habits. When you pursue good habits and not bad
habits, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities decline."

#### 74  {#section-73 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that prevents the awakening
factors from arising, or, if they've already arisen, prevents them from
being fully developed like irrational application of mind. When you
apply the mind irrationally, the awakening factors don't arise, or, if
they've already arisen, they're not fully developed."

#### 75  {#section-74 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to the
awakening factors, or, if they've already arisen, fully develops them
like rational application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally,
the awakening factors arise, or, if they've already arisen, they're
fully developed."

#### 76  {#section-75 .unnumbered}

"Loss of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst
thing to lose."

#### 77  {#section-76 .unnumbered}

"Growth of relatives, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best
thing to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

#### 78  {#section-77 .unnumbered}

"Loss of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst thing
to lose."

#### 79  {#section-78 .unnumbered}

"Growth of wealth, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best
thing to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

#### 80  {#section-79 .unnumbered}

"Loss of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the worst thing
to lose."

#### 81  {#section-80 .unnumbered}

"Growth of fame, mendicants, is a small thing. Wisdom is the best thing
to grow.

So you should train like this: 'We will grow in wisdom.' That's how you
should train."

## The Chapter on Negligence  {#the-chapter-on-negligence .unnumbered}

### N 1.82--97 *Pamādādivagga* {#n-1.8297-pamādādivagga .unnumbered}

#### 82  {#section-81 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
negligence. Negligence is very harmful."

#### 83  {#section-82 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
diligence. Diligence is very beneficial."

#### 84  {#section-83 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
laziness. Laziness is very harmful."

#### 85  {#section-84 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
arousing energy. Arousing energy is very beneficial."

#### 86  {#section-85 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
having many wishes. Having many wishes is very harmful."

#### 87  {#section-86 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
having few wishes. Having few wishes is very beneficial."

#### 88  {#section-87 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack
of contentment. Lack of contentment is very harmful."

#### 89  {#section-88 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
contentment. Contentment is very beneficial."

#### 90  {#section-89 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
irrational application of mind. Irrational application of mind is very
harmful."

#### 91  {#section-90 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
rational application of mind. Rational application of mind is very
beneficial."

#### 92  {#section-91 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as lack
of situational awareness. Lack of situational awareness is very
harmful."

#### 93  {#section-92 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
situational awareness. Situational awareness is very beneficial."

#### 94  {#section-93 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as bad
friends. Bad friends are very harmful."

#### 95  {#section-94 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
good friends. Good friends are very beneficial."

#### 96  {#section-95 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very harmful as
pursuing bad habits and not good habits. Pursuing bad habits and not
good habits is very harmful."

#### 97  {#section-96 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very beneficial as
pursuing good habits and not bad habits. Pursuing good habits and not
bad habits is very beneficial."

## The Chapter on Negligence (2nd)  {#the-chapter-on-negligence-2nd .unnumbered}

### N 1.98--139 *Dutiyapamādādivagga* {#n-1.98139-dutiyapamādādivagga .unnumbered}

#### 98  {#section-97 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as negligence. Negligence is very harmful."

#### 99  {#section-98 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as diligence. Diligence is very
beneficial."

#### 100  {#section-99 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as laziness. Laziness is very harmful."

#### 101  {#section-100 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as arousing energy. Arousing energy is
very beneficial."

#### 102--109  {#section-101 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as having many wishes ... having few wishes
... lack of contentment ... contentment ... irrational application of
mind ... rational application of mind ... lack of situational awareness
... situational awareness ..."

#### 110  {#section-102 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as bad friends. Bad friends are very
harmful."

#### 111  {#section-103 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account exterior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as good friends. Good friends are very
beneficial."

#### 112  {#section-104 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very harmful as pursuing bad habits and not good habits.
Pursuing bad habits and not good habits is very harmful."

#### 113  {#section-105 .unnumbered}

"Taking into account interior factors, mendicants, I do not see a single
one that is so very beneficial as pursuing good habits and not bad
habits. Pursuing good habits and not bad habits is very beneficial."

#### 114  {#section-106 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like negligence. Negligence leads to
the decline and disappearance of the true teaching."

#### 115  {#section-107 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like diligence. Diligence
leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

#### 116  {#section-108 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like laziness. Laziness leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching."

#### 117  {#section-109 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like arousing energy.
Arousing energy leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

#### 118--128  {#section-110 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching like having many wishes ... having
few wishes ... lack of contentment ... contentment ... irrational
application of mind ... rational application of mind ... lack of
situational awareness ... situational awareness ... bad friends ... good
friends ... pursuing bad habits and not good habits. Pursuing bad habits
and not good habits leads to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching."

#### 129  {#section-111 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching like pursuing good habits
and not bad habits. Pursuing good habits and not bad habits leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching"

#### 130  {#section-112 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as
the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear."

#### 131  {#section-113 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as not
the teaching are acting for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear."

#### 132--139  {#section-114 .unnumbered}

"Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as
found in the monastic law ... what is found in the monastic law as not
found in the monastic law ... what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as spoken and stated by the Realized One ... what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as not spoken and stated by the
Realized One ... what was not practiced by the Realized One as practiced
by the Realized One ... what was practiced by the Realized One as not
practiced by the Realized One ... what was not prescribed by the
Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One ... what was prescribed
by the Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One are acting for
the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the
harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. They create much
wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

## The Chapter on Not the Teaching  {#the-chapter-on-not-the-teaching .unnumbered}

### N 1.140--149 *Adhammavagga* {#n-1.140149-adhammavagga .unnumbered}

#### 140  {#section-115 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is not the teaching as
not the teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people,
for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans. They create much merit and make the true teaching continue."

#### 141  {#section-116 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain what is the teaching as the
teaching are acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the
people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They
create much merit and make the true teaching continue."

#### 142--149  {#section-117 .unnumbered}

"Those mendicants who explain what is not found in the monastic law as
not found in the monastic law ... what is found in the monastic law as
found in the monastic law ... what was not spoken and stated by the
Realized One as not spoken and stated by the Realized One ... what was
spoken and stated by the Realized One as spoken and stated by the
Realized One ... what was not practiced by the Realized One as not
practiced by the Realized One ... what was practiced by the Realized One
as practiced by the Realized One ... what was not prescribed by the
Realized One as not prescribed by the Realized One ... what was
prescribed by the Realized One as prescribed by the Realized One ... are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

## The Chapter on Non-offense  {#the-chapter-on-non-offense .unnumbered}

### N 1.150--169 *Anāpattivagga* {#n-1.150169-anāpattivagga .unnumbered}

#### 150  {#section-118 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as an offense are
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. They
create much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

#### 151  {#section-119 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as non-offense are
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. Those
mendicants create much wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

#### 152--159  {#section-120 .unnumbered}

"Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a serious offense ... a
serious offense as a light offense ... an offense committed with corrupt
intention as an offense not committed with corrupt intention ... an
offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense committed
with corrupt intention ... an offense requiring rehabilitation as an
offense not requiring rehabilitation ... an offense not requiring
rehabilitation as an offense requiring rehabilitation ... an offense
with redress as an offense without redress ... an offense without
redress as an offense with redress are acting for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. Those mendicants create much
wickedness and make the true teaching disappear."

#### 160  {#section-121 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain non-offense as non-offense are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

#### 161  {#section-122 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those mendicants who explain an offense as an offense are
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create much
merit and make the true teaching continue."

#### 162--169  {#section-123 .unnumbered}

"Those mendicants who explain a light offense as a light offense ... a
serious offense as a serious offense ... an offense committed with
corrupt intention as an offense committed with corrupt intention ... an
offense not committed with corrupt intention as an offense not committed
with corrupt intention ... an offense requiring rehabilitation as an
offense requiring rehabilitation ... an offense not requiring
rehabilitation as an offense not requiring rehabilitation ... an offense
with redress as an offense with redress ... an offense without redress
as an offense without redress are acting for the welfare and happiness
of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness
of gods and humans. They create much merit and make the true teaching
continue."

## The Chapter on One Person  {#the-chapter-on-one-person .unnumbered}

### N 1.170--187 *Ekapuggalavagga* {#n-1.170187-ekapuggalavagga .unnumbered}

#### 170  {#section-124 .unnumbered}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. What one person? The Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is the one
person, mendicants, who arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

#### 171  {#section-125 .unnumbered}

"The appearance of one person, mendicants, is rare in the world. What
one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, whose appearance is rare in
the world."

#### 172  {#section-126 .unnumbered}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world who is an incredible human
being. What one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, who arises in the
world who is an incredible human being."

#### 173  {#section-127 .unnumbered}

"The death of one person, mendicants, is regretted by many people. What
one person? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, whose death is regretted by
many people."

#### 174  {#section-128 .unnumbered}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world unique, without peer or
counterpart, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without
equal, the best of men. What one person? The Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is the one person, mendicants, who
arises in the world unique, without peer or counterpart, incomparable,
matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the best of men."

#### 175--186  {#section-129 .unnumbered}

"With the appearance of one person, mendicants, there is the appearance
of a great eye, a great light, a great radiance, and the six
unsurpassable things; the realization of the four kinds of textual
analysis; the penetration of many and diverse elements; the realization
of the fruit of knowledge and freedom; the realization of the fruits of
stream-entry, once-return, non-return, and perfection. What one person?
The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha. This is
the one person whose appearance brings the appearance of a great eye, a
great light, a great radiance, and the six unsurpassable things; the
realization of the four kinds of textual analysis; the penetration of
many and diverse elements; the realization of the fruit of knowledge and
release; the realization of the fruits of stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and perfection."

#### 187  {#section-130 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single other person who rightly keeps
rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One like [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} rightly
keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One."

## Seven Chapters on the Foremost Persons  {#seven-chapters-on-the-foremost-persons .unnumbered}

### N 1.188--197 *Paṭhamavagga* {#n-1.188197-paṭhamavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my monk disciples in seniority is [Koṇḍañña]{lang="sa"}
Who Understood.

... with great wisdom is [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}.

... with psychic power is [Mahāmoggallāna]{lang="sa"}.

... who advocate austerities is [Mahākassapa]{lang="sa"}.

... with clairvoyance is Anuruddha.

... from eminent families is Bhaddiya son of [Kāḷīgodhā]{lang="sa"}.

... with a charming voice is Bhaddiya the Dwarf.

... with a lion's roar is [Bhāradvāja]{lang="sa"} the Alms-Gatherer.

... who speak on the teaching is [Puṇṇa]{lang="sa"} son of
[Mantāṇī]{lang="sa"}.

... who explain in detail the meaning of a brief statement is
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}."

### N 1.198--208 *Dutiyavagga* {#n-1.198208-dutiyavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my monk disciples in creating a mind-made body is
[Cūḷapanthaka]{lang="sa"}.

... who are skilled in the evolution of consciousness is
[Cūḷapanthaka]{lang="sa"}.

... who are skilled in the evolution of perception is
[Mahāpanthaka]{lang="sa"}.

... who live without conflict is [Subhūti]{lang="sa"}.

... who are worthy of a religious donation is [Subhūti]{lang="sa"}.

... who stay in the wilderness is Revata of the Acacia Wood.

... who practice absorption is Revata the Doubter.

... who are energetic is [Soṇa]{lang="sa"} [Koḷivisa]{lang="sa"}.

... who enunciate well is [Soṇa]{lang="sa"} of the Sharp Ears.

... who receive many possessions is [Sīvali]{lang="sa"}.

... who are committed to faith is [Vakkalī]{lang="sa"}."

### N 1.209--218 *Tatiyavagga* {#n-1.209218-tatiyavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my monk disciples who want to train is
[Rāhula]{lang="sa"}.

... who went forth out of faith is [Raṭṭhapāla]{lang="sa"}.

... who are the first to pick up a ballot slip is
[Kuṇḍadhāna]{lang="sa"}.

... who are eloquent poets is [Vaṅgīsa]{lang="sa"}.

... who are impressive all around is Upasena son of
[Vaṅgantā]{lang="sa"}.

... who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta.

... who are beloved of the deities is Pilindavaccha.

... with swift insight is [Bāhiya]{lang="sa"} of the Bark Cloth.

... with brilliant speech is Kassapa the Prince.

... who have attained the methods of textual analysis is
[Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"}."

### N 1.219--234 *Catutthavagga* {#n-1.219234-catutthavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my monk disciples who are very learned is Ānanda.

... with a good memory is Ānanda.

... with an extensive range is Ānanda.

... in retention is Ānanda.

... as a personal attendant is Ānanda.

... with a large congregation is Kassapa of [Uruvelā]{lang="sa"}.

... who inspire lay families is [Kāḷudāyī]{lang="sa"}.

... with good health is Bakkula.

... who recollect past lives is Sobhita.

... who have memorized the monastic law is [Upāli]{lang="sa"}.

... who advise the nuns is Nandaka.

... who guard the sense doors is Nanda.

... who advise the monks is [Mahākappina]{lang="sa"}.

... who are skilled in the fire element is [Sāgata]{lang="sa"}.

... who inspire eloquent teachings is [Rādha]{lang="sa"}.

... who wear coarse robes is [Mogharājā]{lang="sa"}."

### N 1.235--247 *Pañcamavagga* {#n-1.235247-pañcamavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my nun disciples in seniority is
[Mahāpajāpati]{lang="sa"} [Gotamī]{lang="sa"}.

... with great wisdom is [Khemā]{lang="sa"}.

... with psychic power is [Uppalavaṇṇā]{lang="sa"}.

... who have memorized the monastic law is [Paṭācārā]{lang="sa"}.

... who speak on the teaching is [Dhammadinnā]{lang="sa"}.

... who practice absorption is [Nandā]{lang="sa"}.

... who are energetic is [Soṇā]{lang="sa"}.

... with clairvoyance is [Sakulā]{lang="sa"}.

... with swift insight is [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"} of the Curly Hair.

... who recollect past lives is [Bhaddā]{lang="sa"} daughter of Kapila.

... who have attained great insight is [Bhaddakaccānā]{lang="sa"}.

... who wear coarse robes is [Kisāgotamī]{lang="sa"}.

... who are committed to faith is [Siṅgāla]{lang="sa"}'s Mother."

### N 1.248--257 *Chaṭṭhavagga* {#n-1.248257-chaṭṭhavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my laymen in first going for refuge are the merchants
Tapussa and Bhallika.

... as a donor is the householder Sudatta [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}.

... who speak on the teaching is the householder Citta
[Macchikāsaṇḍika]{lang="sa"}.

... who attract a congregation by the four ways of being inclusive is
Hatthaka of [Āḷavī]{lang="sa"}.

... who donate fine things is [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} Sakka.

... who donate nice things is the householder Ugga of
[Vesālī]{lang="sa"}.

... who attend on the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} is the householder Uggata of
Elephant Village.

... who have experiential confidence is [Sūrambaṭṭha]{lang="sa"}.

... who have confidence in a person is [Jīvaka]{lang="sa"}
[Komārabhacca]{lang="sa"}.

... who are intimate is the householder Nakula's father."

### N 1.258--267 *Sattamavagga* {#n-1.258267-sattamavagga .unnumbered}

"The foremost of my laywomen in first going for refuge is
[Sujātā]{lang="sa"} the general's daughter.

... as a donor is [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother.

... who are very learned is [Khujjuttarā]{lang="sa"}.

... who dwell in love is [Sāmāvatī]{lang="sa"}.

... who practice absorption is [Uttarānanda]{lang="sa"}'s mother.

... who give fine things is [Suppavāsā]{lang="sa"} the Koliyan.

... who care for the sick is the laywoman [Suppiyā]{lang="sa"}.

... who have experiential confidence is [Kātiyānī]{lang="sa"}.

... who are intimate is the householder Nakula's mother.

... whose confidence is based on oral transmission is the laywoman
[Kāḷī]{lang="sa"} of Kuraraghara."

## Three Chapters on the Impossible  {#three-chapters-on-the-impossible .unnumbered}

### N 1.268--277 *Paṭhamavagga* {#n-1.268277-paṭhamavagga .unnumbered}

#### 268  {#section-131 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take any condition as permanent. That is not
possible. But it is possible for an ordinary person to take some
condition as permanent. That is possible."

#### 269  {#section-132 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take any condition as pleasant. But it is
possible for an ordinary person to take some condition as pleasant."

#### 270  {#section-133 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to take anything as self. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to take something as self."

#### 271  {#section-134 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder their mother. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to murder their mother."

#### 272  {#section-135 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder their father. But it is possible for an
ordinary person to murder their father."

#### 273  {#section-136 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to murder a perfected one. But it is possible for
an ordinary person to murder a perfected one."

#### 274  {#section-137 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to injure a Realized One with malicious intent. But
it is possible for an ordinary person to injure a Realized One with
malicious intent."

#### 275  {#section-138 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to cause a schism in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. But
it is possible for an ordinary person to cause a schism in the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}."

#### 276  {#section-139 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a person
accomplished in view to dedicate themselves to another teacher. But it
is possible for an ordinary person to dedicate themselves to another
teacher."

#### 277  {#section-140 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two perfected ones,
fully awakened Buddhas to arise in the same solar system at the same
time. But it is possible for just one perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, to arise in one solar system."

### N 1.278--286 *Dutiyavagga* {#n-1.278286-dutiyavagga .unnumbered}

#### 278  {#section-141 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for two wheel-turning
monarchs to arise in the same solar system at the same time. But it is
possible for just one wheel-turning monarch to arise in one solar
system."

#### 279  {#section-142 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a
perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. But it is possible for a man to
be a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha."

#### 280  {#section-143 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to be a
wheel-turning monarch. But it is possible for a man to be a
wheel-turning monarch."

#### 281--283  {#section-144 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a woman to perform
the role of Sakka, [Māra]{lang="sa"}, or the Divinity. But it is
possible for a man to perform the role of Sakka, [Māra]{lang="sa"}, or
the Divinity."

#### 284  {#section-145 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable,
desirable, agreeable result to come from bad bodily conduct. But it is
possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable result to come from
bad bodily conduct."

#### 285--286  {#section-146 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for a likable,
desirable, agreeable result to come from bad verbal ... bad mental
conduct. But it is possible for an unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable
result to come from bad verbal ... bad mental conduct."

### N 1.287--295 *Tatiyavagga* {#n-1.287295-tatiyavagga .unnumbered}

#### 287  {#section-147 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable,
undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good bodily conduct. But
it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable result to come from
good bodily conduct."

#### 288--289  {#section-148 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen for an unlikable,
undesirable, disagreeable result to come from good verbal ... good
mental conduct. But it is possible for a likable, desirable, agreeable
result to come from good verbal ... good mental conduct."

#### 290  {#section-149 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in bad bodily conduct, could for that reason alone, when their
body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. But it is possible that someone who has engaged in bad bodily
conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks up, after
death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

#### 291--292  {#section-150 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in bad verbal ... bad mental conduct could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. But it is possible that someone who has engaged
in bad verbal ... bad mental conduct could, for that reason alone, when
their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell."

#### 293  {#section-151 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their
body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. But it is possible that someone who has engaged in
good bodily conduct could, for that reason alone, when their body breaks
up, after death, be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

#### 294--295  {#section-152 .unnumbered}

"It is impossible, mendicants, it cannot happen that someone who has
engaged in good verbal ... good mental conduct could, for that reason
alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But it is possible that someone
who has engaged in good verbal ... good mental conduct could, for that
reason alone, when their body breaks up, after death, be reborn in a
good place, heavenly realm."

## Four Chapters on One Thing  {#four-chapters-on-one-thing .unnumbered}

### N 1.296--305 *Paṭhamavagga* {#n-1.296305-paṭhamavagga .unnumbered}

#### 296  {#section-153 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. What one thing? Recollection of the Buddha. This one
thing, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

#### 297--305  {#section-154 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. What one thing? Recollection of the teaching ...
Recollection of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ... Recollection of ethical
conduct ... Recollection of generosity ... Recollection of the deities
... Mindfulness of breathing ... Mindfulness of death ... Mindfulness of
the body ... Recollection of peace. This one thing, when developed and
cultivated, leads solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation,
peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment."

### N 1.306--315 *Dutiyavagga* {#n-1.306315-dutiyavagga .unnumbered}

#### 306  {#section-155 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
wrong view. When you have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise or,
when they have arisen, they increase and grow."

#### 307  {#section-156 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow like
right view. When you have right view, unarisen skillful qualities arise
or, when they have arisen, they increase and grow."

#### 308  {#section-157 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to unskillful
qualities, or makes skillful qualities decline like wrong view. When you
have wrong view, unskillful qualities arise and skillful qualities
decline."

#### 309  {#section-158 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to skillful
qualities, or makes unskillful qualities decline like right view. When
you have right view, skillful qualities arise and unskillful qualities
decline."

#### 310  {#section-159 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to wrong view,
and once arisen, makes it grow like irrational application of mind. When
you apply the mind irrationally, wrong view arises, and once arisen it
grows."

#### 311  {#section-160 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that gives rise to right view,
or, once it has already arisen, makes it grow like rational application
of mind. When you apply the mind rationally, right view arises, and once
arisen it grows."

#### 312  {#section-161 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to
be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell like wrong view. It is because they have
wrong view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

#### 313  {#section-162 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that causes sentient beings to
be reborn, when their body breaks up, after death, in a good place, a
heavenly realm like right view. It is because they have right view that
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm."

#### 314  {#section-163 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when an individual has wrong view, whatever bodily, verbal,
or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions,
aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is unlikable, undesirable,
disagreeable, harmful, and suffering. Why is that? Because their view is
bad. Suppose a seed of neem, angled gourd, or bitter gourd was planted
in moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its bitter, acerbic, and unpleasant taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is bad. In the same way, when an individual has wrong
view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is unlikable, undesirable, disagreeable, harmful, and suffering.
Why is that? Because their view is bad."

#### 315  {#section-164 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when an individual has right view, whatever bodily, verbal,
or mental deeds they undertake in line with that view, their intentions,
aims, wishes, and choices all lead to what is likable, desirable,
agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is that? Because their view is
good. Suppose a seed of sugar cane, fine rice, or grape was planted in
moist earth. Whatever nutrients it takes up from the earth and water
would lead to its sweet, pleasant, and delicious taste. Why is that?
Because the seed is good. In the same way, when an individual has right
view, whatever bodily, verbal, or mental deeds they undertake in line
with that view, their intentions, aims, wishes, and choices all lead to
what is likable, desirable, agreeable, beneficial, and pleasant. Why is
that? Because their view is good."

### N 1.316--332 *Tatiyavagga* {#n-1.316332-tatiyavagga .unnumbered}

#### 316  {#section-165 .unnumbered}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. What one person? Someone with wrong
view, whose perspective is distorted. They draw many people away from
the true teaching and establish them in false teachings. This is one
person who arises in the world for the detriment and suffering of the
people, against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of
gods and humans."

#### 317  {#section-166 .unnumbered}

"One person, mendicants, arises in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans. What one person? Someone with right view,
whose perspective is undistorted. They draw many people away from false
teachings and establish them in the true teaching. This is one person
who arises in the world for the welfare and happiness of the people, for
the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

#### 318  {#section-167 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single thing that is so very blameworthy as
wrong view. Wrong view is the most blameworthy thing of all."

#### 319  {#section-168 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I do not see a single other person who acts for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans, as that futile man, the
bamboo-staffed ascetic. Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would
bring harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish, so too that
futile man, the bamboo-staffed ascetic, is a trap for humans, it seems
to me. He has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and
disaster of many beings."

#### 320  {#section-169 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a poorly explained
teaching and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who
practices accordingly all create much wickedness. Why is that? Because
the teaching is poorly explained."

#### 321  {#section-170 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, the one who encourages someone in a well explained teaching
and training, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much merit. Why is that? Because the teaching is
well explained."

#### 322  {#section-171 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training, the donor
should know moderation, not the recipient. Why is that? Because the
teaching is poorly explained."

#### 323  {#section-172 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training, the recipient
should know moderation, not the donor. Why is that? Because the teaching
is well explained."

#### 324  {#section-173 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training an energetic
person lives in suffering. Why is that? Because the teaching is poorly
explained."

#### 325  {#section-174 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training a lazy person
lives in suffering. Why is that? Because the teaching is well
explained."

#### 326  {#section-175 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a poorly explained teaching and training a lazy person
lives happily. Why is that? Because the teaching is poorly explained."

#### 327  {#section-176 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a well explained teaching and training an energetic
person lives happily. Why is that? Because the teaching is well
explained."

#### 328  {#section-177 .unnumbered}

"Just as, mendicants, even a tiny bit of fecal matter still stinks, so
too I don't approve of even a tiny bit of continued existence, not even
as long as a finger-snap."

#### 329--332  {#section-178 .unnumbered}

"Just as even a tiny bit of urine, or spit, or pus, or blood still
stinks, so too I don't approve of even a tiny bit of continued
existence, not even as long as a finger-snap."

### N 1.333--377 *Catutthavagga* {#n-1.333377-catutthavagga .unnumbered}

#### 333  {#section-179 .unnumbered}

"Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, while the hilly terrain,
inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are
many; so too the sentient beings born on land are few, while those born
in water are many.

#### 334  {#section-180 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings reborn as humans are few, while those not
reborn as humans are many.

#### 335  {#section-181 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings reborn in civilized countries are few,
while those reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, are
many.

#### 336  {#section-182 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who are wise, bright, clever, and able to
distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are few, while
the sentient beings who are witless, dull, idiotic, and unable to
distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said are many.

#### 337  {#section-183 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who have the noble eye of wisdom are few,
while those who are ignorant and confused are many.

#### 338  {#section-184 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who get to see a Realized One are few,
while those who don't get to see a Realized One are many.

#### 339  {#section-185 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who get to hear the teaching and training
proclaimed by a Realized One are few, while those sentient beings who
don't get to hear the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One
are many.

#### 340  {#section-186 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who remember the teachings they hear are
few, while those who don't remember the teachings are many.

#### 341  {#section-187 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who examine the meaning of the teachings
they have memorized are few, while those who don't examine the meaning
of the teachings are many.

#### 342  {#section-188 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who understand the meaning and the
teaching and practice accordingly are few, while those who understand
the meaning and the teaching but don't practice accordingly are many.

#### 343  {#section-189 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings inspired by inspiring places are few,
while those who are uninspired are many.

#### 344  {#section-190 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who, being inspired, strive effectively
are few, while those who, even though inspired, don't strive effectively
are many.

#### 345  {#section-191 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who, relying on letting go, gain
immersion, gain unification of mind are few, while those who don't gain
immersion, don't gain unification of mind relying on letting go are
many.

#### 346  {#section-192 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who get the best food and flavors are
few, while those who don't get the best food and flavors, but get by
with scraps in an alms bowl are many.

#### 347  {#section-193 .unnumbered}

... so too the sentient beings who get the essence of the meaning, the
essence of the teaching, and the essence of freedom are few, while the
sentient beings who don't get the essence of the meaning, the essence of
the teaching, and the essence of freedom are many.

So you should train like this: 'We will get the essence of the meaning,
the essence of the teaching, the essence of freedom.' That's how you
should train."

#### 348--350  {#section-194 .unnumbered}

"Just as, mendicants, in the Black Plum Tree Land the delightful parks,
woods, meadows, and lotus ponds are few, while the hilly terrain,
inaccessible riverlands, stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains are
many; so too, those who die as humans and are reborn as humans are few,
while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 351--353  {#section-195 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as humans and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as humans and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 354--356  {#section-196 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

#### 357--359  {#section-197 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as gods and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as gods and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 360--362  {#section-198 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 363--365  {#section-199 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die in hell and are reborn as gods are few,
while those who die in hell and are reborn in hell, or the animal realm,
or the ghost realm are many."

#### 366--368  {#section-200 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 369--371  {#section-201 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as animals and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as animals and are reborn in hell, or the
animal realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 372--374  {#section-202 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as humans are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

#### 375--377  {#section-203 .unnumbered}

"... the sentient beings who die as ghosts and are reborn as gods are
few, while those who die as ghosts and are reborn in hell, or the animal
realm, or the ghost realm are many."

## The Chapter on Inspiring Qualities  {#the-chapter-on-inspiring-qualities .unnumbered}

### N 1.378--393 *Pasādakaradhammavagga* {#n-1.378393-pasādakaradhammavagga .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, this is definitely something worth having, that is, living
in the wilderness ...

eating only almsfood ...

wearing rag robes ...

having just three robes ...

teaching Dhamma ...

memorizing the monastic law ...

being very learned ...

being respected ...

being well-presented ...

having a following ...

having a large following ...

coming from a good family ...

being handsome ...

being one who enunciates well ...

having few wishes ...

being healthy."

## Another Chapter on a Finger-Snap  {#another-chapter-on-a-finger-snap .unnumbered}

### N 1.394--574 *Aparaaccharāsaṅghātavagga* {#n-1.394574-aparaaccharāsaṅghātavagga .unnumbered}

#### 394  {#section-204 .unnumbered}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the first absorption, even as long
as a finger-snap, they are called a mendicant who does not lack
absorption, who follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to
advice, and who does not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more
so those who make much of it!"

#### 395--401  {#section-205 .unnumbered}

"If, mendicants, a mendicant develops the second ... third ... or fourth
absorption ... or the heart's release by love ... or the heart's release
by compassion ... or the heart's release by rejoicing ... or the heart's
release by equanimity, even as long as a finger-snap ...

#### 402--405  {#section-206 .unnumbered}

If a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body ... feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 406--409  {#section-207 .unnumbered}

If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise, even for the time
of a finger-snap ... If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have
arisen are given up, even for the time of a finger-snap ... If they
generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so
that skillful qualities that have not arisen do arise, even for the time
of a finger-snap ... If they generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort,
exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen
remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are fulfilled by
development, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 410--413  {#section-208 .unnumbered}

If they develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort ... the basis of psychic
power that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort
... the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and
active effort, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 414--418  {#section-209 .unnumbered}

If they develop the faculty of faith ... the faculty of energy ... the
faculty of mindfulness ... the faculty of immersion ... the faculty of
wisdom, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 419--423  {#section-210 .unnumbered}

If they develop the power of faith ... the power of energy ... the power
of mindfulness ... the power of immersion ... the power of wisdom, even
for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 424--430  {#section-211 .unnumbered}

If they develop the awakening factor of mindfulness ... the awakening
factor of investigation of principles ... the awakening factor of energy
... the awakening factor of rapture ... the awakening factor of
tranquility ... the awakening factor of immersion ... the awakening
factor of equanimity, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 431--438  {#section-212 .unnumbered}

If they develop right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion, even for the time of a finger-snap ...

#### 439--446  {#section-213 .unnumbered}

Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limited, both
pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they are aware that: 'I know and see.'
... Perceiving form internally, they see forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they are aware that: 'I know and
see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they see forms externally,
limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they are aware that: 'I
know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they see forms
externally, limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they are
aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they
see forms externally that are blue, with blue color and blue appearance.
Mastering them, they are aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not
perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are yellow,
with yellow color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they are aware
that: 'I know and see.' ... Not perceiving form internally, they see
forms externally that are red, with red color and red appearance.
Mastering them, they are aware that: 'I know and see.' ... Not
perceiving form internally, they see forms externally that are white,
with white color and white appearance. Mastering them, they are aware
that: 'I know and see.' ...

#### 447--454  {#section-214 .unnumbered}

Having physical form, they see forms ... not perceiving form internally,
they see forms externally ... they're focused only on beauty ... going
totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions of
impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite space
... going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness ... going totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', they enter
and remain in the dimension of nothingness ... going totally beyond the
dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception ... going totally beyond the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, they enter and
remain in the cessation of perception and feeling ...

#### 455--464  {#section-215 .unnumbered}

They develop the meditation on universal earth ... the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
the meditation on universal consciousness ...

#### 465--474  {#section-216 .unnumbered}

They develop the perception of ugliness ... the perception of death ...
the perception of the repulsiveness of food ... the perception of
dissatisfaction with the whole world ... the perception of impermanence
... the perception of suffering in impermanence ... the perception of
not-self in suffering ... the perception of giving up ... the perception
of fading away ... the perception of cessation ...

#### 475--484  {#section-217 .unnumbered}

They develop the perception of impermanence ... the perception of
not-self ... the perception of death ... the perception of the
repulsiveness of food ... the perception of dissatisfaction with the
whole world ... the perception of a skeleton ... the perception of the
worm-infested corpse ... the perception of the livid corpse ... the
perception of the split open corpse ... the perception of the bloated
corpse ...

#### 485--494  {#section-218 .unnumbered}

They develop the recollection of the Buddha ... the recollection of the
teaching ... the recollection of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ... the
recollection of ethical conduct ... the recollection of generosity ...
the recollection of the deities ... mindfulness of breathing ... the
recollection of death ... mindfulness of the body ... the recollection
of peace ...

#### 495--574  {#section-219 .unnumbered}

They develop the faculty of faith together with the first absorption ...
the faculty of energy ... the faculty of mindfulness ... the faculty of
immersion ... the faculty of wisdom ... the power of faith ... the power
of energy ... the power of mindfulness ... the power of immersion ...
the power of wisdom together with the first absorption ...

Together with the second absorption ...

the third absorption ...

the fourth absorption ...

love ...

compassion ...

rejoicing ...

They develop the faculty of faith together with equanimity ... They
develop the faculty of energy ... the faculty of mindfulness ... the
faculty of immersion ... the faculty of wisdom ... the power of faith
... the power of energy ... the power of mindfulness ... the power of
immersion ... the power of wisdom.

That mendicant is called a mendicant who does not lack absorption, who
follows the Teacher's instructions, who responds to advice, and who does
not eat the country's alms in vain. How much more so those who make much
of it!"

## The Chapter on Mindfulness of the Body  {#the-chapter-on-mindfulness-of-the-body .unnumbered}

### N 1.575--615 *Kāyagatāsativagga* {#n-1.575615-kāyagatāsativagga .unnumbered}

#### 575  {#section-220 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, anyone who brings into their mind the great ocean includes
all of the streams that run into it. In the same way, anyone who has
developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body includes all of the
skillful qualities that play a part in realization."

#### 576--582  {#section-221 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to great
urgency ... great benefit ... great sanctuary from the yoke ...
mindfulness and awareness ... gaining knowledge and vision ... blissful
meditation in this life ... the realization of the fruit of knowledge
and freedom. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing,
when developed and cultivated, leads to great urgency ... great benefit
... great sanctuary from the yoke ... mindfulness and awareness ...
gaining knowledge and vision ... blissful meditation in this life ...
the realization of the fruit of knowledge and freedom."

#### 583  {#section-222 .unnumbered}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated the body and
mind become tranquil, thinking and considering settle down, and all of
the qualities that play a part in realization are fully developed. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, the body and mind become tranquil, thinking and considering
settle down, and all of the qualities that play a part in realization
are fully developed."

#### 584  {#section-223 .unnumbered}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, unskillful
qualities do not arise, and, if they've already arisen, they are given
up. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is
developed and cultivated, unskillful qualities do not arise, and, if
they've already arisen, they are given up."

#### 585  {#section-224 .unnumbered}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, skillful
qualities arise, and, once they've arisen, they increase and grow. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, skillful qualities arise, and, once they've arisen, they
increase and grow."

#### 586--590  {#section-225 .unnumbered}

"When one thing, mendicants, is developed and cultivated, ignorance is
given up ... knowledge arises ... the conceit 'I am' is given up ... the
underlying tendencies are uprooted ... the fetters are given up. What
one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one thing is developed and
cultivated, ignorance is given up ... knowledge arises ... the conceit
'I am' is given up ... the underlying tendencies are uprooted ... the
fetters are given up."

#### 591--592  {#section-226 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to
demolition by wisdom ... to extinguishment by not grasping. What one
thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing, mendicants, when
developed and cultivated leads to demolition by wisdom ... to
extinguishment by not grasping."

#### 593--595  {#section-227 .unnumbered}

"When one thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of
many elements ... the penetration of diverse elements ... the analysis
of many elements. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. When this one
thing is developed and cultivated there is the penetration of many
elements ... the penetration of diverse elements ... the analysis of
many elements."

#### 596--599  {#section-228 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated leads to the
realization of the fruit of stream-entry ... once-return ... non-return
... perfection. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing,
when developed and cultivated, leads to the realization of the fruit of
stream-entry ... once-return ... non-return ... perfection."

#### 600--615  {#section-229 .unnumbered}

"One thing, mendicants, when developed and cultivated, leads to the
getting of wisdom ... the growth of wisdom ... the increase of wisdom
... to great wisdom ... to widespread wisdom ... to abundant wisdom ...
to deep wisdom ... to extraordinary wisdom ... to vast wisdom ... to
much wisdom ... to fast wisdom ... to light wisdom ... to laughing
wisdom ... to swift wisdom ... to sharp wisdom ... to penetrating
wisdom. What one thing? Mindfulness of the body. This one thing, when
developed and cultivated, leads to the getting of wisdom ... the growth
of wisdom ... the increase of wisdom ... to great wisdom ... to
widespread wisdom ... to abundant wisdom ... to deep wisdom ... to
extraordinary wisdom ... to vast wisdom ... to much wisdom ... to fast
wisdom ... to light wisdom ... to laughing wisdom ... to swift wisdom
... to sharp wisdom ... to penetrating wisdom."

## The Chapter on Freedom From Death  {#the-chapter-on-freedom-from-death .unnumbered}

### N 1.616--627 *Amatavagga* {#n-1.616627-amatavagga .unnumbered}

#### 616  {#section-230 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who don't enjoy mindfulness of the body don't enjoy
freedom from death. Those who enjoy mindfulness of the body enjoy
freedom from death."

#### 617  {#section-231 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't enjoyed mindfulness of the body haven't
enjoyed freedom from death. Those who have enjoyed mindfulness of the
body have enjoyed freedom from death."

#### 618  {#section-232 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who have lost mindfulness of the body have lost
freedom from death. Those who haven't lost mindfulness of the body
haven't lost freedom from death."

#### 619  {#section-233 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who have missed out on mindfulness of the body have
missed out on freedom from death. Those who have undertaken mindfulness
of the body have not missed out on freedom from death."

#### 620  {#section-234 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who have neglected mindfulness of the body have
neglected freedom from death. Those who have not neglected mindfulness
of the body have not neglected freedom from death."

#### 621  {#section-235 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who have forgotten mindfulness of the body have
forgotten freedom from death. Those who haven't forgotten mindfulness of
the body haven't forgotten freedom from death."

#### 622  {#section-236 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't cultivated mindfulness of the body
haven't cultivated freedom from death. Those who have cultivated
mindfulness of the body have cultivated freedom from death."

#### 623  {#section-237 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't developed mindfulness of the body haven't
developed freedom from death. Those who have developed mindfulness of
the body have developed freedom from death."

#### 624  {#section-238 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't made much of mindfulness of the body
haven't made much of the deathless. Those who have made much of
mindfulness of the body have made much of the deathless."

#### 625  {#section-239 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't had insight into mindfulness of the body
haven't had insight into freedom from death. Those who have had insight
into mindfulness of the body have had insight into freedom from death."

#### 626  {#section-240 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't completely understood mindfulness of the
body haven't completely understood freedom from death. Those who have
completely understood mindfulness of the body have completely understood
freedom from death."

#### 627  {#section-241 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those who haven't realized mindfulness of the body haven't
realized freedom from death. Those who have realized mindfulness of the
body have realized freedom from death."

The thousand discourses of the Ones are completed.

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE ONES IS FINISHED.
:::

# The Book of the Twos  {#the-book-of-the-twos-1 .unnumbered}

::: center
*[the first fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Punishments  {#the-chapter-on-punishments .unnumbered}

### N 2.1--10 *Kammakaraṇavagga* {#n-2.110-kammakaraṇavagga .unnumbered}

#### 1. Faults  {#faults .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"There are, mendicants, these two faults. What two? The fault apparent
in this life, and the fault to do with lives to come.

What is the fault apparent in this life? It's when someone sees that
kings have arrested a bandit, a criminal, and subjected them to various
punishments---whipping, caning, and clubbing; cutting off hands or feet,
or both; cutting off ears or nose, or both; the 'porridge pot', the
'shell-shave', the '[Rāhu]{lang="sa"}'s mouth', the 'garland of fire',
the 'burning hand', the 'bulrush twist', the 'bark dress', the
'antelope', the 'meat hook', the 'coins', the 'caustic pickle', the
'twisting bar', the 'straw mat'; being splashed with hot oil, being fed
to the dogs, being impaled alive, and being beheaded.

It occurs to them: 'If I were to commit the kinds of bad deeds for which
the kings arrested that bandit, that criminal, the rulers would arrest
me and subject me to the same punishments. Afraid of the fault apparent
in this life, they do not steal the belongings of others. This is called
the fault apparent in this life.

What is the fault to do with lives to come? It's when someone reflects:
'Bad conduct of body, speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in the
next life. If I conduct myself badly, then, when my body breaks up,
after death, won't I be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell?' Afraid of the fault to do with lives to come, they
give up bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and develop good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, keeping themselves pure. This
is called the fault to do with lives to come.

These are the two faults.

So you should train like this: 'We will fear the fault apparent in this
life, and we will fear the fault to do with lives to come. We will fear
faults, seeing the danger in faults.' That's how you should train. If
you fear faults, seeing the danger in faults, you can expect to be freed
from all faults."

#### 2. Endeavor  {#endeavor .unnumbered}

"These two endeavors are challenging in the world. What two? The
endeavor of laypeople staying in a home to provide robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And the endeavor of
those gone forth from the lay life to homelessness to let go of all
attachments. These are the two endeavors that are challenging in the
world.

The better of these two endeavors is the effort to let go of all
attachments.

So you should train like this: 'We shall endeavor to let go of all
attachments.' That's how you should train."

#### 3. Mortifying  {#mortifying .unnumbered}

"These two things, mendicants, are mortifying. What two? It's when
someone has done bad things and not done good things, by way of body,
speech, and mind. Thinking, 'I've done bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind', they're mortified. Thinking, 'I haven't done good
things by way of body, speech, and mind', they're mortified. These are
the two things that are mortifying."

#### 4. Not Mortifying  {#not-mortifying .unnumbered}

"These two things, mendicants, are not mortifying. What two? It's when
someone has done good things and not done bad things, by way of body,
speech, and mind. Thinking, 'I've done good things by way of body,
speech, and mind', they're not mortified. Thinking, 'I haven't done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind', they're not mortified. These
are the two things that are not mortifying."

#### 5. Learned for Myself  {#learned-for-myself .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I have learned these two things for myself---to never be
content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying.

I never stopped trying, thinking: 'Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and
bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will not
stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human strength,
energy, and vigor.'

It was by diligence that I achieved awakening, and by diligence that I
achieved the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

If you too never stop trying, thinking: 'Gladly, let only skin, sinews,
and bones remain! Let the flesh and blood waste away in my body! I will
not stop trying until I have achieved what is possible by human
strength, energy, and vigor.' You will soon realize the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. You will live
having achieved with your own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

So you should train like this: 'We will never stop trying, thinking:
"Gladly, let only skin, sinews, and bones remain! Let the flesh and
blood waste away in my body! I will not stop trying until I have
achieved what is possible by human strength, energy, and vigor."' That's
how you should train."

#### 6. Fetters  {#fetters .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Seeing things that
are prone to being fettered as gratifying, and seeing things that are
prone to being fettered as boring. When you keep seeing things that are
prone to being fettered as gratifying, you don't give up greed, hate,
and delusion. When these are not given up, you're not freed from
rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. You're not freed from suffering, I say.

When you keep seeing things that are prone to being fettered as boring,
you give up greed, hate, and delusion. When these are given up, you're
freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress. You're freed from suffering, I say. These are the
two things."

#### 7. Dark  {#dark .unnumbered}

"These two things, mendicants, are dark. What two? Lack of conscience
and prudence. These are the two things that are dark."

#### 8. Bright  {#bright .unnumbered}

"These two things, mendicants, are bright. What two? Conscience and
prudence. These are the two things that are bright."

#### 9. Conduct  {#conduct .unnumbered}

"These two bright things, mendicants, protect the world. What two?
Conscience and prudence. If these two bright things did not protect the
world, there would be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or
wives and partners of tutors and respected people. The world would
become dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals. But because the two bright things protect the world, there is
recognition of the status of mother, aunts, and wives and partners of
tutors and respected people."

#### 10. Entering the Rainy Season  {#entering-the-rainy-season .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two entries to the rainy season. What two?
Earlier and later. These are the two entries to the rainy season."

## The Chapter on Disciplinary Issues  {#the-chapter-on-disciplinary-issues .unnumbered}

### N 2.11--20 *Adhikaraṇavagga* {#n-2.1120-adhikaraṇavagga .unnumbered}

#### 11  {#section-242 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? In this context, the
power of development is the power of the trainees. For when you rely on
the power of a trainee, you give up greed, hate, and delusion. Then you
don't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad. This is called
the power of development. These are the two powers."

#### 12  {#section-243 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a mendicant
develops the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of
principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity,
which rely on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as
letting go. This is called the power of development. These are the two
powers."

#### 13  {#section-244 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two powers. What two? The power of
reflection and the power of development. And what, mendicants, is the
power of reflection? It's when someone reflects: 'Bad conduct of body,
speech, or mind has a bad, painful result in both this life and the
next.' Reflecting like this, they give up bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body, speech, and
mind, keeping themselves pure. This is called the power of reflection.

And what, mendicants, is the power of development? It's when a
mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third
absorption, where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and
pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in
the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity
and mindfulness. This is called the power of development. These are the
two powers."

#### 14  {#section-245 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, the Realized One has two ways of teaching the Dhamma. What
two? In brief and in detail. These are the Realized One's two ways of
teaching the Dhamma."

#### 15  {#section-246 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, in a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant
nor the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect
that issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants
won't live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the
offending mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves, you can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and
enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably.

And how, mendicants, does an offending mendicant carefully check
themselves? An offending mendicant reflects: 'I have committed a certain
unskillful offense with the body. That mendicant saw me do this. If I
hadn't committed that offense, they wouldn't have seen me. But since I
did commit that offense, they did see me. When they saw me, they were
upset, and they voiced their unhappiness to me. Then I also got upset,
so I told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone who owes
customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an offending
mendicant carefully checks themselves.

And how, mendicants, does an accusing mendicant carefully check
themselves? An accusing mendicant reflects: 'This mendicant has
committed a certain unskillful offense with the body. I saw them do
that. If they hadn't committed that offense, I wouldn't have seen them.
But since they did commit that offense, I did see them. When I saw them,
I was upset, and I voiced my unhappiness to them. Then they also got
upset, so they told others. So the mistake is mine alone, like someone
who owes customs duty on their goods.' That's how, mendicants, an
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves.

In a disciplinary issue, if neither the offending mendicant nor the
accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you can expect that
issue will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants won't
live comfortably. But in a disciplinary issue, if both the offending
mendicant and the accusing mendicant carefully checks themselves, you
can expect that issue won't lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the
mendicants will live comfortably."

#### 16  {#section-247 .unnumbered}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"Unprincipled and immoral conduct is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm?"

"Principled and moral conduct is the reason why some sentient beings,
when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he was righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

#### 17  {#section-248 .unnumbered}

Then the brahmin [Jānussoṇi]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell."

"But what is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why some
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm?"

"What they've done and what they've not done. That's why some sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm."

"I don't understand the meaning of what Mister Gotama has said in brief,
without explaining the details. Mister Gotama, please teach me this
matter in detail so I can understand the meaning."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," [Jānussoṇi]{lang="sa"} replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, brahmin, someone has done bad things and not done good things
by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what they've
not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after
death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Furthermore, brahmin, someone has done good things and not done bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. So what they've done and what
they've not done is why some sentient beings, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

#### 18  {#section-249 .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should
not do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should not be done, what
drawbacks should they expect?"

"They should expect these drawbacks. They blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people criticize them. They get a bad reputation.
They feel lost when they die. And when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These are the drawbacks they should expect."

"Ānanda, I absolutely say that you should do good things by way of body,
speech, and mind."

"But, sir, if someone does these things that should be done, what
benefits should they expect?"

"They should expect these benefits. They don't blame themselves. After
examination, sensible people praise them. They get a good reputation.
They don't feel lost when they die. And when the body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the
benefits they should expect."

#### 19  {#section-250 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, give up the unskillful. It is possible to give up the
unskillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Give up the
unskillful.' But it is possible, and so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'
And if giving up the unskillful led to harm and suffering, I would not
say: 'Give up the unskillful.' But giving up the unskillful leads to
welfare and happiness, so I say: 'Give up the unskillful.'

Mendicants, develop the skillful. It is possible to develop the
skillful. If it wasn't possible, I wouldn't say: 'Develop the skillful.'
But it is possible, and so I say: 'Develop the skillful.' If developing
the skillful led to harm and suffering I wouldn't say: 'Develop the
skillful.' But developing the skillful leads to welfare and happiness,
so I say: 'Develop the skillful.'"

#### 20  {#section-251 .unnumbered}

"These two things, mendicants, lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are misplaced, and
the meaning is misinterpreted. When the words and phrases are misplaced,
the meaning is misinterpreted. These two things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These two things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What two? The words and phrases are well organized,
and the meaning is correctly interpreted. When the words and phrases are
well organized, the meaning is correctly interpreted. These two things
lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

## The Chapter on Fools  {#the-chapter-on-fools .unnumbered}

### N 2.21--31 *Bālavagga* {#n-2.2131-bālavagga .unnumbered}

#### 21  {#section-252 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who doesn't recognize
when they've made a mistake. And one who doesn't properly accept the
confession of someone who's made a mistake. These are the two fools.

There are two who are astute. What two? One who recognizes when they've
made a mistake. And one who properly accepts the confession of someone
who's made a mistake. These are the two who are astute."

#### 22  {#section-253 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
is hateful and hides it, and one whose faith is mistaken. These two
misrepresent the Realized One."

#### 23  {#section-254 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as spoken by him. And
one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by
him. These two misrepresent the Realized One.

These two don't misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains what was not spoken by the Realized One as not spoken by him.
And one who explains what was spoken by the Realized One as spoken by
him. These two don't misrepresent the Realized One."

#### 24  {#section-255 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these two misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse whose
meaning is explicit. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is
explicit as a discourse in need of interpretation. These two
misrepresent the Realized One."

#### 25  {#section-256 .unnumbered}

"These two don't misrepresent the Realized One. What two? One who
explains a discourse in need of interpretation as a discourse in need of
interpretation. And one who explains a discourse whose meaning is
explicit as a discourse whose meaning is explicit. These two don't
misrepresent the Realized One."

#### 26  {#section-257 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, one who is underhand can expect one of two destinies: hell
or the animal realm.

One who is aboveboard can expect one of two destinies: as a god or a
human."

#### 27  {#section-258 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, one who has wrong view can expect one of two destinies:
hell or the animal realm."

#### 28  {#section-259 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, one who has right view can expect one of two destinies: as
a god or a human."

#### 29  {#section-260 .unnumbered}

"There are two places waiting to receive an unethical person: hell and
the animal realm.

There are two places waiting to receive an ethical person: the realms of
gods and humans."

#### 30  {#section-261 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I see two reasons to frequent remote lodgings in the
wilderness and the forest. What two? Seeing happiness for oneself in
this life, and having sympathy for future generations. I see two reasons
to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

#### 31  {#section-262 .unnumbered}

"These two things play a part in realization. What two? Serenity and
discernment.

What is the benefit of developing serenity? The mind is developed. What
is the benefit of developing the mind? Greed is given up.

What is the benefit of developing discernment? Wisdom is developed. What
is the benefit of developing wisdom? Ignorance is given up.

The mind contaminated by greed is not free; and wisdom contaminated by
ignorance does not grow. In this way, freedom of heart comes from the
fading away of greed, while freedom by wisdom comes from the fading away
of ignorance."

## The Chapter on the Peaceful Mind  {#the-chapter-on-the-peaceful-mind .unnumbered}

### N 2.32--41 *Samacittavagga* {#n-2.3241-samacittavagga .unnumbered}

#### 32  {#section-263 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the level of the untrue person and the
level of the true person. Listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is the level of the untrue person? The untrue person is ungrateful
and thankless, for the wicked only know how to be ungrateful and
thankless. It is totally the level of an untrue person to be ungrateful
and thankless. The true person is grateful and thankful, for the
virtuous only know how to be grateful and thankful. It is totally the
level of a true person to be grateful and thankful."

#### 33  {#section-264 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I say that these two people cannot easily be repaid. What
two? Mother and father.

You would not have done enough to repay your mother and father even if
you were to carry your mother around on one shoulder and your father on
the other, and if you lived like this for a hundred years, and if you
were to anoint, massage, bathe, and rub them; and even if they were to
defecate and urinate right there.

Even if you were to establish your mother and father as supreme monarchs
of this great earth, abounding in the seven treasures, you would still
not have done enough to repay them. Why is that? Parents are very
helpful to their children: they raise them, nurture them, and show them
the world.

But you have done enough, more than enough, to repay them if you
encourage, settle, and ground unfaithful parents in faith, unethical
parents in ethical conduct, stingy parents in generosity, or ignorant
parents in wisdom."

#### 34  {#section-265 .unnumbered}

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha, "What does Mister Gotama teach?
What does he explain?"

"Brahmin, I teach action and inaction."

"But in what way does Mister Gotama teach action and inaction?"

"I teach inaction regarding bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and
the many kinds of unskillful things. I teach action regarding good
bodily, verbal, and mental conduct, and the many kinds of skillful
things. This is the kind of action and inaction that I teach."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

#### 35  {#section-266 .unnumbered}

Then the householder [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha, "How many in the
world are worthy of a religious donation? And where should a gift be
given?"

"Householder, there are two in the world who are worthy of a religious
donation: the trainee and the adept. These two in the world are worthy
of a religious donation, and that's where you should give a gift."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "In this world, the trainee and the adept,\
> are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.\
> They are sincere in body,\
> speech, and mind.\
> This is the field for sponsors of sacrifice---\
> what's given here is very fruitful."

#### 36  {#section-267 .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery.

Now at that time Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s
mother in the Eastern Monastery. There [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} addressed
the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said this:

"I will teach you about a person fettered internally and one fettered
externally. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said this:

"Who is a person fettered internally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they
pass away from there, they're a returner, who comes back to this place.
This is called a person who is fettered internally, a returner, who
comes back to this place.

Who is a person fettered externally? It's a mendicant who is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. They enter and remain in
a certain peaceful state of freed mind. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in one of the orders of gods. When they pass away
from there, they're a non-returner, not coming back to this place. This
is called a person who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does
not come back to this place.

Furthermore, a mendicant is ethical ... they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They simply practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding sensual pleasures. They simply practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding future lives. They
practice for the ending of craving. They practice for the ending of
greed. When their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in one of
the orders of gods. When they pass away from there, they are
non-returners, not coming back to this place. This is called a person
who is fettered externally, a non-returner, who does not come back to
this place."

Then several peaceful-minded deities went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood
to one side, and said to the Buddha, "Sir, Venerable
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is
teaching the mendicants about a person with internal fetters and one
with external fetters. The assembly is overjoyed! Sir, please go to
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} out of sympathy." The Buddha consented
with silence.

Then the Buddha, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract
their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove and reappeared in the stilt
longhouse of [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, in
front of [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. He sat on the seat spread out.
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to him:

"Just now, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, several peaceful-minded deities came
up to me, bowed, and stood to one side. Those deities said to me: 'Sir,
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} is in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery, where he is
teaching the mendicants about a person with internal fetters and one
with external fetters. The assembly is overjoyed! Sir, please go to
Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} out of sympathy.'

Those deities, though they number ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or
sixty, can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up against
each other.

[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, you might think: 'Surely those deities, since so
many of them can stand on the point of a needle without bumping up
against each other, must have developed their minds in that place.' But
you should not see it like this. It was right here that those deities
developed their minds.

So you should train like this: 'We shall have peaceful faculties and
peaceful minds.' That's how you should train. When your faculties and
mind are peaceful, your acts of body, speech, and mind will be peaceful,
thinking: 'We shall present the gift of peace to our spiritual
companions.' That's how you should train.

Those wanderers of other religions, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, who have not
heard this exposition of the teaching are lost."

#### 37  {#section-268 .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time Venerable
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} was staying at [Varaṇā]{lang="sa"}, on the bank
of the Kaddama Lake.

Then the brahmin [Ārāmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} went up to
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}:

"What is the cause, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, what is the reason why
aristocrats fight with aristocrats, brahmins fight with brahmins, and
householders fight with householders?"

"It is because of their insistence on sensual desire, their shackles,
avarice, and attachment, that aristocrats fight with aristocrats,
brahmins fight with brahmins, and householders fight with householders."

"What is the cause, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, what is the reason why
ascetics fight with ascetics?"

"It is because of their insistence on views, their shackles, avarice,
and attachment, that ascetics fight with ascetics."

"Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, is there anyone in the world who has gone
beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the insistence on views?"

"There is, brahmin."

"Who in the world has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and
the insistence on views?"

"In the eastern lands there is a city called [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"}.
There the Blessed One is now staying, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. He, brahmin, has gone beyond the insistence on sensual
desire and the insistence on views."

When this was said, the brahmin [Ārāmadaṇḍa]{lang="sa"} got up from his
seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

He who has gone beyond the insistence on sensual desire and the
insistence on views.

Excellent, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} has made the
teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth,
may Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life."

#### 38  {#section-269 .unnumbered}

At one time Venerable [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"} was staying near
[Madhurā]{lang="sa"}, in Gunda's Grove.

Then the brahmin [Kandarāyana]{lang="sa"} went up to
[Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}, and exchanged greetings with him ... He sat
down to one side and said to [Mahākaccāna]{lang="sa"}:

"I have heard, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}, that the ascetic
[Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} doesn't bow to old brahmins, the elderly and
senior, who are advanced in years and have reached the final stage of
life; nor does he rise in their presence or offer them a seat. And this
is indeed the case, for the ascetic [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} does not bow to
old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister
[Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}."

"There is the stage of an elder and the stage of youth as explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. If an elder, though eighty, ninety, or a hundred years
old, still dwells in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as a child, not a senior. If a youth,
young, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life, does not dwell in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying them,
consumed by thoughts of them, burning with fever for them, and eagerly
seeking more, they are reckoned as astute, a senior."

When this was said, the brahmin [Kandarāyana]{lang="sa"} got up from his
seat, placed his robe over one shoulder, and bowed with his head at the
feet of the young mendicants, saying, "The good sirs are elders, at the
stage of the elder; we are youths, at the stage of youth.

Excellent, Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"}! ... From this day forth, may
Mister [Kaccāna]{lang="sa"} remember me as a lay follower who has gone
for refuge for life."

#### 39  {#section-270 .unnumbered}

"At a time when bandits are strong, kings are weak. Then the king is not
at ease when going out or coming back or when touring the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are not at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when bad mendicants are strong, good-hearted mendicants
are weak. Then the good-hearted mendicants continually adhere to silence
in the midst of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, or they stay in the
borderlands. This is for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans.

At a time when kings are strong, bandits are weak. Then the king is at
ease when going out or coming back or when inspecting the provinces. The
brahmins and householders, likewise, are at ease when going out or
coming back, or when inspecting their business activities. In the same
way, at a time when good-hearted mendicants are strong, bad mendicants
are weak. Then the bad mendicants continually adhere to silence in the
midst of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, or they leave for some place or other.
This is for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

#### 40  {#section-271 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I don't praise wrong practice for these two, for laypeople
and renunciates. Because of wrong practice, neither laypeople nor
renunciates succeed in completing the system of the skillful teaching.

I praise right practice for these two, for laypeople and renunciates.
Because of right practice, both laypeople and renunciates succeed in
completing the system of the skillful teaching."

#### 41  {#section-272 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, by memorizing the discourses incorrectly, taking only a
semblance of the phrasing, some mendicants shut out the meaning and the
teaching. They act for the detriment and suffering of the people,
against the people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and
humans. They create much wickedness and make the true teaching
disappear.

But by memorizing the discourses well, not taking only a semblance of
the phrasing, some mendicants reinforce the meaning and the teaching.
They act for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people,
for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans. They create
much merit and make the true teaching continue."

## The Chapter on Assemblies  {#the-chapter-on-assemblies .unnumbered}

### N 2.42--51 *Parisavagga* {#n-2.4251-parisavagga .unnumbered}

#### 42  {#section-273 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A shallow
assembly and a deep assembly. And what is a shallow assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants are restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and
immersion, with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. This is
called a shallow assembly.

And what is a deep assembly? An assembly where the mendicants are not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but have
established mindfulness, situational awareness, immersion, unified
minds, and restrained faculties. This is called a deep assembly. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the deep
assembly."

#### 43  {#section-274 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? A divided
assembly and a harmonious assembly. And what is a divided assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants argue, quarrel, and dispute, continually
wounding each other with barbed words. This is called a divided
assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly. These are the two assemblies. The better
of these two assemblies is the harmonious assembly."

#### 44  {#section-275 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the worst and an assembly of the best. And what is an assembly of the
worst? An assembly where the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack,
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized. Those who come after follow their example. They too become
indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not
rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of the worst.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders;
instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after follow their example. They too are not indulgent or
slack, nor are they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in
seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called an assembly of
the best. These are the two assemblies. The better of these two
assemblies is the assembly of the best."

#### 45  {#section-276 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An ignoble
assembly and a noble assembly. And what is an ignoble assembly? An
assembly where the mendicants don't truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called an ignoble assembly.

And what is a noble assembly? An assembly where the mendicants truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called a noble assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
noble assembly."

#### 46  {#section-277 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly of
the dregs and an assembly of the cream. And what is an assembly of the
dregs? An assembly where the mendicants make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. This is called an
assembly of the dregs.

And what is an assembly of the cream? An assembly where the mendicants
make decisions unprejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and
cowardice. This is called an assembly of the cream. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly of the
cream."

#### 47  {#section-278 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning, and an assembly educated in
questioning, not in fancy talk. And what is an assembly educated in
fancy talk, not in questioning? It is an assembly where, when discourses
spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited the mendicants do
want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand, and they
think those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when
they've memorized those teachings they don't question or examine each
other, saying: 'Why does it say this? What does that mean?' So they
don't clarify what is unclear, or reveal what is obscure, or dispel
doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This is called an assembly
educated in fancy talk, not in questioning.

And what is an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk? It
is an assembly where, when discourses composed by poets---poetry, with
fancy words and phrases, composed by outsiders or spoken by
disciples---are being recited the mendicants do not want to listen. They
don't actively listen or try to understand, nor do they think those
teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses spoken
by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent, dealing with
emptiness---are being recited the mendicants do want to listen. They
actively listen and try to understand, and they think those teachings
are worth learning and memorizing. And when they've memorized those
teachings they question and examine each other, saying: 'Why does it say
this? What does that mean?' So they clarify what is unclear, reveal what
is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters. This
is called an assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk. These
are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
assembly educated in questioning, not in fancy talk."

#### 48  {#section-279 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly that
values things of the flesh, not the true teaching, and an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. And what is an
assembly that values things of the flesh, not the true teaching? It is
an assembly where the mendicants praise each other in front of the
white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so is freed both
ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct witness;
so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith; so-and-so is
a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith; so-and-so is
ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad character.'
They thereby acquire material things. And when they get these things,
they use them tied, infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and
not understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that values
things of the flesh, not the true teaching.

And what is an assembly that values the true teaching, not things of the
flesh? It is an assembly where the mendicants don't praise each other in
front of the white-clothed laypeople, saying: 'The mendicant so-and-so
is freed both ways; so-and-so is freed by wisdom; so-and-so is a direct
witness; so-and-so is attained to view; so-and-so is freed by faith;
so-and-so is a follower of teachings; so-and-so is a follower by faith;
so-and-so is ethical, of good character; so-and-so is unethical, of bad
character.' They thereby acquire material things. And when they get
these things, they use them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This is called an assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh. These are the two
assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the assembly that
values the true teaching, not things of the flesh."

#### 49  {#section-280 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unjust
assembly and a just assembly. And what is an unjust assembly? An
assembly where legal acts against the teaching proceed, while legal acts
in line with the teaching don't proceed. Legal acts against the training
proceed, while legal acts in line with the training don't proceed. Legal
acts against the teaching are explained, while legal acts in line with
the teaching aren't explained. Legal acts against the training are
explained, while legal acts in line with the training aren't explained.
This is called an unjust assembly.

And what is a just assembly? An assembly where legal acts in line with
the teaching proceed, while legal acts against the teaching don't
proceed. Legal acts in line with the training proceed, while legal acts
against the training don't proceed. Legal acts in line with the teaching
are explained, while legal acts against the teaching aren't explained.
Legal acts in line with the training are explained, while legal acts
against the training aren't explained. This is called a just assembly.
These are the two assemblies. The better of these two assemblies is the
just assembly."

#### 50  {#section-281 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An unprincipled
assembly and a principled assembly ... The better of these two
assemblies is the principled assembly."

#### 51  {#section-282 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two assemblies. What two? An assembly with
unprincipled speech, and an assembly with principled speech. And what is
an assembly with unprincipled speech? It is an assembly where the
mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not. But
they don't persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, nor
do they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Unable
to persuade or convince each other, they can't let go of their opinions.
They obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue, insisting that: 'This
is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is called an assembly
with unprincipled speech.

And what is an assembly with principled speech? It is an assembly where
the mendicants take up disciplinary issues, whether legitimate or not.
Then they persuade each other or allow themselves to be persuaded, and
they convince each other or allow themselves to be convinced. Since they
are able to persuade and convince each other, they let go of their
opinions. They don't obstinately stick to that disciplinary issue or
insist that: 'This is the only truth, anything else is futile.' This is
called an assembly with principled speech. These are the two assemblies.
The better of these two assemblies is the assembly with principled
speech."

::: center
*[the second fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Persons  {#the-chapter-on-persons .unnumbered}

### N 2.52--63 *Puggalavagga* {#n-2.5263-puggalavagga .unnumbered}

#### 52  {#section-283 .unnumbered}

"These two people, mendicants, arise in the world for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans. What two? The Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These are
the two people who arise in the world for the welfare and happiness of
the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
gods and humans."

#### 53  {#section-284 .unnumbered}

"These two people, mendicants, arise in the world who are incredible
human beings. What two? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These are the two people
who arise in the world who are incredible human beings."

#### 54  {#section-285 .unnumbered}

"There are two people, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many
people. What two? The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning monarch. These are the two
people, mendicants, whose death is regretted by many people."

#### 55  {#section-286 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these two are worthy of a monument. What two? The Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and the wheel-turning
monarch. These are the two who are worthy of a monument."

#### 56  {#section-287 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two kinds of Buddhas. What two? The Realized One,
the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha; and an Independent Buddha.
These are the two kinds of Buddhas."

#### 57  {#section-288 .unnumbered}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred elephant.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

#### 58  {#section-289 .unnumbered}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a thoroughbred horse.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

#### 59  {#section-290 .unnumbered}

"These two, mendicants, are not startled by a crack of thunder. What
two? A mendicant who has ended defilements; and a lion, king of beasts.
These are the two who are not startled by a crack of thunder."

#### 60  {#section-291 .unnumbered}

"Aborigines see two reasons not to use regular speech. What two?
Thinking: 'May we not lie, and may we not misrepresent others with
falsehoods.' Aborigines see these two reasons not to use regular
speech."

#### 61  {#section-292 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, females die without getting enough of two things. What two?
Sexual intercourse and giving birth. Females die without getting enough
of these two things."

#### 62  {#section-293 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about living with bad people and living
with good people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What is it like living with bad people? How do bad people live
together?

It's when a senior mendicant thinks: 'No mendicant, whether senior,
middle, or junior, should admonish me; and I shouldn't admonish any
mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a mendicant---whether
senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me, they wouldn't be
sympathetic, and I'd bother them by saying "No!" And anyway I wouldn't
deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.'

And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 'No mendicant, whether
senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me; and I shouldn't admonish
any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a
mendicant---whether senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me,
they wouldn't be sympathetic, and I'd bother them by saying "No!" And
anyway I wouldn't deal with it even if I saw what I did wrong.'

That's what it's like living with bad people; that's how bad people live
together.

What is it like living with good people? How do good people live
together? It's when a senior mendicant thinks:

'Any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior, should admonish me;
and I should admonish any mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior.
If a mendicant---whether senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish
me, they'd be sympathetic, so I wouldn't bother them, but say "Thank
you!" And I'd deal with it when I saw what I did wrong.'

And a middle or a junior mendicant also thinks: 'Any mendicant, whether
senior, middle, or junior, may admonish me; and I'll admonish any
mendicant, whether senior, middle, or junior. If a mendicant---whether
senior, middle, or junior---were to admonish me, they'd be sympathetic,
so I wouldn't bother them, but say "Thank you!" And I'd deal with it
when I saw what I did wrong.'

That's what it's like living with good people; that's how good people
live together."

#### 63  {#section-294 .unnumbered}

"In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk,
contempt for each other's views, resentment, bitterness, and
exasperation is not settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue
will lead to lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will not
live comfortably.

In any disciplinary issue where on both sides the endless talk, contempt
for each other's views, resentment, bitterness, and exasperation is well
settled, you can expect that this disciplinary issue won't lead to
lasting acrimony and enmity, and the mendicants will live comfortably."

## The Chapter on Happiness  {#the-chapter-on-happiness .unnumbered}

### N 2.64--76 *Sukhavagga* {#n-2.6476-sukhavagga .unnumbered}

#### 64  {#section-295 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of laypeople, and the happiness of renunciates. These are the
two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
the happiness of renunciates."

#### 65  {#section-296 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Sensual
happiness and the happiness of renunciation. These are the two kinds of
happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness
of renunciation."

#### 66  {#section-297 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of attachments, and the happiness of no attachments. These are
the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness
is the happiness of no attachments."

#### 67  {#section-298 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Defiled
happiness and undefiled happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is the happiness of no
defilements."

#### 68  {#section-299 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness of the flesh and happiness not of the flesh. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness not of the flesh."

#### 69  {#section-300 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Noble
happiness and ignoble happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is noble happiness."

#### 70  {#section-301 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? Physical
happiness and mental happiness. These are the two kinds of happiness.
The better of these two kinds of happiness is mental happiness."

#### 71  {#section-302 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness with rapture and happiness free of rapture. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness free of rapture."

#### 72  {#section-303 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness with pleasure and happiness with equanimity. These are the two
kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness is
happiness with equanimity."

#### 73  {#section-304 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two? The
happiness of immersion and the happiness without immersion. These are
the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of happiness
is the happiness of immersion."

#### 74  {#section-305 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on rapture and happiness that relies on freedom
from rapture. These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these
two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on freedom from
rapture."

#### 75  {#section-306 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on pleasure and happiness that relies on
equanimity. These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these
two kinds of happiness is happiness that relies on equanimity."

#### 76  {#section-307 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of happiness. What two?
Happiness that relies on form and happiness that relies on the formless.
These are the two kinds of happiness. The better of these two kinds of
happiness is happiness that relies on the formless."

## The Chapter with a Foundation  {#the-chapter-with-a-foundation .unnumbered}

### N 2.77--86 *Sanimittavagga* {#n-2.7786-sanimittavagga .unnumbered}

#### 77  {#section-308 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a basis, not without
a basis. By giving up that basis, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

#### 78  {#section-309 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a source, not without
a source. By giving up that source, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

#### 79  {#section-310 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a cause, not without
a cause. By giving up that cause, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

#### 80  {#section-311 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with conditions, not
without conditions. By giving up those conditions, those bad, unskillful
qualities do not occur."

#### 81  {#section-312 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a reason, not without
a reason. By giving up that reason, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

#### 82  {#section-313 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with form, not without
form. By giving up that form, those bad, unskillful qualities do not
occur."

#### 83  {#section-314 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with feeling, not without
feeling. By giving up that feeling, those bad, unskillful qualities do
not occur."

#### 84  {#section-315 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with perception, not
without perception. By giving up that perception, those bad, unskillful
qualities do not occur."

#### 85  {#section-316 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with consciousness, not
without consciousness. By giving up that consciousness, those bad,
unskillful qualities do not occur."

#### 86  {#section-317 .unnumbered}

"Bad, unskillful qualities, mendicants, arise with a conditioned basis,
not without a conditioned basis. By giving up that conditioned basis,
those bad, unskillful qualities do not occur."

## The Chapter on Two Things  {#the-chapter-on-two-things .unnumbered}

### N 2.87--97 *Dhammavagga* {#n-2.8797-dhammavagga .unnumbered}

#### 87  {#section-318 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom. These are the two things."

#### 88  {#section-319 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Exertion, and not
being scattered. These are the two things."

#### 89  {#section-320 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Name and form. These
are the two things."

#### 90  {#section-321 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Knowledge and
freedom. These are the two things."

#### 91  {#section-322 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Views favoring
continued existence and views favoring ending existence. These are the
two things."

#### 92  {#section-323 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Lack of conscience
and prudence. These are the two things."

#### 93  {#section-324 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Conscience and
prudence. These are the two things."

#### 94  {#section-325 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Being hard to
admonish and having bad friends. These are the two things."

#### 95  {#section-326 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Being easy to
admonish and having good friends. These are the two things."

#### 96  {#section-327 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Skill in the
elements and skill in application of mind. These are the two things."

#### 97  {#section-328 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two things. What two? Skill in offenses
and skill in resolving offenses. These are the two things."

## The Chapter on Fools  {#the-chapter-on-fools-1 .unnumbered}

### N 2.98--117 *Bālavagga* {#n-2.98117-bālavagga .unnumbered}

#### 98  {#section-329 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who takes responsibility
for what has not come to pass, and one who doesn't take responsibility
for what has come to pass. These are the two fools."

#### 99  {#section-330 .unnumbered}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who doesn't take
responsibility for what has not come to pass, and one who does take
responsibility for what has come to pass. These are the two who are
astute."

#### 100  {#section-331 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
unallowable. These are the two fools."

#### 101  {#section-332 .unnumbered}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
allowable. These are the two who are astute."

#### 102  {#section-333 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives a
non-offense as an offense, and one who perceives an offense as a
non-offense. These are the two fools."

#### 103  {#section-334 .unnumbered}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives a non-offense
as a non-offense, and one who perceives an offense as an offense. These
are the two who are astute."

#### 104  {#section-335 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as
not the teaching. These are the two fools."

#### 105  {#section-336 .unnumbered}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives the teaching
as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching as not
the teaching. These are the two who are astute."

#### 106  {#section-337 .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are two fools. What two? One who perceives what is
not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as not the training. These are the two fools."

#### 107  {#section-338 .unnumbered}

"There are two who are astute. What two? One who perceives what is not
the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as the training. These are the two who are astute."

#### 108  {#section-339 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who is remorseful over
something they shouldn't be, and one who isn't remorseful over something
they should be. These are the two whose defilements grow."

#### 109  {#section-340 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who isn't
remorseful over something they shouldn't be, and one who is remorseful
over something they should be. These are the two whose defilements don't
grow."

#### 110  {#section-341 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
unallowable as allowable, and one who perceives what is allowable as
unallowable. These are the two whose defilements grow."

#### 111  {#section-342 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives what
is unallowable as unallowable, and one who perceives what is allowable
as allowable. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

#### 112  {#section-343 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives an offense
as a non-offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as an offense.
These are the two whose defilements grow."

#### 113  {#section-344 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives an
offense as an offense, and one who perceives a non-offense as a
non-offense. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

#### 114  {#section-345 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
not the teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives the teaching as
not the teaching. These are the two whose defilements grow."

#### 115  {#section-346 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives the
teaching as the teaching, and one who perceives what is not the teaching
as not the teaching. These are the two whose defilements don't grow."

#### 116  {#section-347 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements grow. What two? One who perceives what is
not the training as the training, and one who perceives what is the
training as not the training. These are the two whose defilements grow."

#### 117  {#section-348 .unnumbered}

"For these two, defilements don't grow. What two? One who perceives what
is not the training as not the training, and one who perceives what is
the training as the training. These are the two whose defilements don't
grow."

::: center
*[the third fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Hopes That Are Hard to Give Up  {#the-chapter-on-hopes-that-are-hard-to-give-up .unnumbered}

### N 2.118--129 *Āsāduppajahavagga* {#n-2.118129-āsāduppajahavagga .unnumbered}

#### 118  {#section-349 .unnumbered}

"These two hopes are hard to give up. What two? The hope for wealth and
the hope for long life. These are two hopes that are hard to give up."

#### 119  {#section-350 .unnumbered}

"These two people are rare in the world. What two? One who takes the
initiative, and one who is grateful and thankful. These are the two
people who are rare in the world."

#### 120  {#section-351 .unnumbered}

"These two people are rare in the world. What two? One who is satisfied,
and one who satisfies others. These are the two people who are rare in
the world."

#### 121  {#section-352 .unnumbered}

"These two people are hard to satisfy in the world. What two? One who
continually hoards wealth, and one who continually wastes wealth. These
are the two people who are hard to satisfy in the world."

#### 122  {#section-353 .unnumbered}

"These two people are easy to satisfy in the world. What two? One who
does not continually hoard wealth, and one who does not continually
waste wealth. These are the two people who are easy to satisfy in the
world."

#### 123  {#section-354 .unnumbered}

"There are two conditions for the arising of greed. What two? The
feature of beauty and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of greed."

#### 124  {#section-355 .unnumbered}

"There are two conditions for the arising of hate. What two? The feature
of harshness and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of hate."

#### 125  {#section-356 .unnumbered}

"There are two conditions for the arising of wrong view. What two? The
voice of another and irrational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of wrong view."

#### 126  {#section-357 .unnumbered}

"There are two conditions for the arising of right view. What two? The
voice of another and rational application of mind. These are the two
conditions for the arising of right view."

#### 127  {#section-358 .unnumbered}

"There are these two offenses. What two? A light offense and a serious
offense. These are the two offenses."

#### 128  {#section-359 .unnumbered}

"There are these two offenses. What two? An offense with corrupt
intention and an offense without corrupt intention. These are the two
offenses."

#### 129  {#section-360 .unnumbered}

"There are these two offenses. What two? An offense requiring
rehabilitation and an offense not requiring rehabilitation. These are
the two offenses."

## The Chapter on Aspiration  {#the-chapter-on-aspiration .unnumbered}

### N 2.130--140 *Āyācanavagga* {#n-2.130140-āyācanavagga .unnumbered}

#### 130  {#section-361 .unnumbered}

"A faithful monk would rightly aspire: 'May I be like
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}!' These are a
standard and a measure for my monk disciples, that is,
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} and [Moggallāna]{lang="sa"}."

#### 131  {#section-362 .unnumbered}

"A faithful nun would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the nuns
[Khemā]{lang="sa"} and [Uppalavaṇṇā]{lang="sa"}!' These are a standard
and a measure for my nun disciples, that is, the nuns [Khemā]{lang="sa"}
and [Uppalavaṇṇā]{lang="sa"}."

#### 132  {#section-363 .unnumbered}

"A faithful layman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the householder
Citta and Hatthaka of [Ãḷavī]{lang="sa"}!' These are a standard and a
measure for my male lay followers, that is, the householder Citta and
Hatthaka of [Ãḷavī]{lang="sa"}."

#### 133  {#section-364 .unnumbered}

"A faithful laywoman would rightly aspire: 'May I be like the laywomen
[Khujjuttarā]{lang="sa"} and [Veḷukaṇṭakī]{lang="sa"}, Nanda's mother!'
These are a standard and a measure for my female lay disciples, that is,
the laywomen [Khujjuttarā]{lang="sa"} and [Veḷukaṇṭakī]{lang="sa"},
Nanda's mother."

#### 134  {#section-365 .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What two? Without
examining or scrutinizing, they praise those deserving of criticism and
they criticize those deserving of praise. When a foolish, incompetent
untrue person has these two qualities they keep themselves broken and
damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible people,
and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving of
criticism and they praise those deserving of praise. When an astute,
competent true person has these two qualities they keep themselves
intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and criticized by
sensible people, and they create much merit."

#### 135  {#section-366 .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What two? Without
examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are dubious,
and they don't arouse faith in things that are inspiring. When a
foolish, incompetent untrue person has these two qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has two qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What two?
After examining or scrutinizing, they don't arouse faith in things that
are dubious, and they do arouse faith in things that are inspiring. When
an astute, competent true person has these two qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

#### 136  {#section-367 .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness. What two? Mother and father. When a foolish, incompetent
untrue person acts wrongly toward these two people they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two people
they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.
What two? Mother and father. When an astute, competent true person acts
rightly toward these two people they keep themselves intact and
unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much merit."

#### 137  {#section-368 .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward two
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness. What two? The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized
One. When a foolish, incompetent untrue person acts wrongly toward these
people they keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much
wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person acts rightly toward two people
they keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be
blamed and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit.
What two? The Realized One and a disciple of the Realized One. When an
astute, competent true person acts rightly toward these two people they
keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

#### 138  {#section-369 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Cleaning your own mind, and not
grasping at anything in the world. These are the two things."

#### 139  {#section-370 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Anger and acrimony. These are the
two things."

#### 140  {#section-371 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Dispelling anger and dispelling
acrimony. These are the two things."

## The Chapter on Giving  {#the-chapter-on-giving .unnumbered}

### N 2.141--150 *Dānavagga* {#n-2.141150-dānavagga .unnumbered}

#### 141  {#section-372 .unnumbered}

"There are these two gifts. What two? A gift of things of the flesh and
a gift of the teaching. These are the two gifts. The better of these two
gifts is the gift of the teaching."

#### 142  {#section-373 .unnumbered}

"There are these two offerings. What two? An offering of things of the
flesh and an offering of the teaching. These are the two offerings. The
better of these two offerings is an offering of the teaching."

#### 143  {#section-374 .unnumbered}

"There are these two acts of generosity. What two? Generosity with
things of the flesh and generosity with the teaching. These are the two
acts of generosity. The better of these two acts of generosity is
generosity with the teaching."

#### 144  {#section-375 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of charity. What two? Charity in things of
the flesh and charity in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
charity. The better of these two kinds of charity is a charity in the
teaching."

#### 145  {#section-376 .unnumbered}

"There are these two riches. What two? Riches in things of the flesh and
riches in the teaching. These are the two riches. The better of these
two riches is riches in the teaching."

#### 146  {#section-377 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of enjoyment. What two? Enjoyment of things
of the flesh and enjoyment of the teaching. These are the two kinds of
enjoyment. The better of these two kinds of enjoyment is the enjoyment
of the teaching."

#### 147  {#section-378 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of sharing. What two? Sharing things of the
flesh and sharing the teaching. These are the two kinds of sharing. The
better of these two kinds of sharing is sharing the teaching."

#### 148  {#section-379 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of inclusion. What two? Inclusion in things
of the flesh and inclusion in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
inclusion. The better of these two kinds of inclusion is inclusion in
the teaching."

#### 149  {#section-380 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of support. What two? Support in things of
the flesh and support in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
support. The better of these two kinds of support is support in the
teaching."

#### 150  {#section-381 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of sympathy. What two? Sympathy in things of
the flesh and sympathy in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
sympathy. The better of these two kinds of sympathy is sympathy in the
teaching."

## The Chapter on Welcome  {#the-chapter-on-welcome .unnumbered}

### N 2.151--162 *Santhāravagga* {#n-2.151162-santhāravagga .unnumbered}

#### 151  {#section-382 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of welcome. What two? Welcome in things of
the flesh and welcome in the teaching. These are the two kinds of
welcome. The better of these two kinds of welcome is the welcome in the
teaching."

#### 152  {#section-383 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of hospitality. What two? Hospitality in
things of the flesh and hospitality in the teaching. These are the two
kinds of hospitality. The better of these two kinds of hospitality is
hospitality in the teaching."

#### 153  {#section-384 .unnumbered}

"There are these two quests. What two? The quest for things of the flesh
and the quest for the teaching. These are the two quests. The better of
these two quests is the quest for the teaching."

#### 154  {#section-385 .unnumbered}

"There are these two searches. What two? The search for things of the
flesh and the search for the teaching. These are the two searches. The
better of these two searches is the search for the teaching."

#### 155  {#section-386 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of seeking. What two? Seeking for things of
the flesh and seeking for the teaching. These are the two kinds of
seeking. The better of these two kinds of seeking is seeking for the
teaching."

#### 156  {#section-387 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of worship. What two? Worship of things of
the flesh and worship of the teaching. These are the two kinds of
worship. The better of these two kinds of worship is worship of the
teaching."

#### 157  {#section-388 .unnumbered}

"There are these two ways of serving guests. What two? Serving guests
with things of the flesh and serving guests with the teaching. These are
the two ways of serving guests. The better of these two ways of serving
guests is to serve them with the teaching."

#### 158  {#section-389 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two successes. What two? Success in things
of the flesh and success in the teaching. These are the two successes.
The better of these two successes is success in the teaching."

#### 159  {#section-390 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of growth. What two? Growth in
things of the flesh and growth in the teaching. These are the two kinds
of growth. The better of these two kinds of growth is growth in the
teaching."

#### 160  {#section-391 .unnumbered}

"There are these two treasures. What two? The treasure of things of the
flesh and the treasure of the teaching. These are the two treasures. The
better of these two treasures is the treasure of the teaching."

#### 161  {#section-392 .unnumbered}

"There are these two kinds of accumulation. What two? Accumulation of
things of the flesh and accumulation of the teaching. These are the two
kinds of accumulation. The better of these two kinds of accumulation is
the accumulation of the teaching."

#### 162  {#section-393 .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these two kinds of increase. What two? Increase
in things of the flesh and increase in the teaching. These are the two
kinds of increase. The better of these two kinds of increase is increase
in the teaching."

## The Chapter on Attainment  {#the-chapter-on-attainment .unnumbered}

### N 2.163--179 *Samāpattivagga* {#n-2.163179-samāpattivagga .unnumbered}

#### 163  {#section-394 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Skill in meditative attainments
and skill in emerging from those attainments. These are the two things."

#### 164  {#section-395 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Integrity and gentleness. These
are the two things."

#### 165  {#section-396 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Patience and sweetness. These are
the two things."

#### 166  {#section-397 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Friendliness and hospitality.
These are the two things."

#### 167  {#section-398 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Harmlessness and purity. These
are the two things."

#### 168  {#section-399 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Not guarding the sense doors and
eating too much. These are the two things."

#### 169  {#section-400 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Guarding the sense doors and
moderation in eating. These are the two things."

#### 170  {#section-401 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? The power of reflection and the
power of development. These are the two things."

#### 171  {#section-402 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? The power of mindfulness and the
power of immersion. These are the two things."

#### 172  {#section-403 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Serenity and discernment. These
are the two things."

#### 173  {#section-404 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Failure in ethical conduct and
failure in view. These are the two things."

#### 174  {#section-405 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Accomplishment in ethical conduct
and accomplishment in view. These are the two things."

#### 175  {#section-406 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Purification of ethics and
purification of view. These are the two things."

#### 176  {#section-407 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Purification of view and making
an effort in line with that view. These are the two things."

#### 177  {#section-408 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? To never be content with skillful
qualities, and to never stop trying. These are the two things."

#### 178  {#section-409 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Lack of mindfulness and lack of
situational awareness. These are the two things."

#### 179  {#section-410 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Mindfulness and situational
awareness. These are the two things."

::: center
*[abbreviated texts]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Anger {#the-chapter-of-abbreviated-texts-beginning-with-anger .unnumbered}

### N 2.180--229 *Kodhapeyyālavagga* {#n-2.180229-kodhapeyyālavagga .unnumbered}

#### 180--184  {#section-411 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Anger and acrimony ... disdain
and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit and deviousness ...
lack of conscience and prudence. These are the two things."

#### 185--189  {#section-412 .unnumbered}

"There are these two things. What two? Freedom from anger and acrimony
... freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom from jealousy and
stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ... conscience and
prudence. These are the two things."

#### 190--194  {#section-413 .unnumbered}

"Anyone who has two things lives in suffering. What two? Anger and
acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit
and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. Anyone who has
these two things lives in suffering."

#### 195--199  {#section-414 .unnumbered}

"Anyone who has these two things lives happily. What two? Freedom from
anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom
from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ...
conscience and prudence. Anyone who has these two things lives happily."

#### 200--204  {#section-415 .unnumbered}

"These two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What two?
Anger and acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess
... deceit and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. These
two things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

#### 205--209  {#section-416 .unnumbered}

"These two things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
two? Freedom from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and
contempt ... freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from
deceit and deviousness ... conscience and prudence. These two things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

#### 210--214  {#section-417 .unnumbered}

"Anyone who has two things is cast down to hell. What two? Anger and
acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy and stinginess ... deceit
and deviousness ... lack of conscience and prudence. Anyone who has
these two things is cast down to hell."

#### 215--219  {#section-418 .unnumbered}

"Anyone who has two things is raised up to heaven. What two? Freedom
from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt ...
freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and
deviousness ... conscience and prudence. Anyone who has these two things
is raised up to heaven."

#### 220--224  {#section-419 .unnumbered}

"When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. What two? Anger and acrimony ... disdain and contempt ... jealousy
and stinginess ... deceit and deviousness ... lack of conscience and
prudence. When they have two things, some people, when their body breaks
up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell."

#### 225--229  {#section-420 .unnumbered}

"When they have two things, some people---when their body breaks up,
after death---are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. What two?
Freedom from anger and acrimony ... freedom from disdain and contempt
... freedom from jealousy and stinginess ... freedom from deceit and
deviousness ... conscience and prudence. When they have these two
things, some people---when their body breaks up, after death---are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning With the Unskillful {#the-chapter-of-abbreviated-texts-beginning-with-the-unskillful .unnumbered}

### N 2.230--279 *Akusalapeyyālavagga* {#n-2.230279-akusalapeyyālavagga .unnumbered}

"These two things are unskillful ... are skillful ... are blameworthy
... are blameless ... have suffering as outcome ... have happiness as
outcome ... result in suffering ... result in happiness ... are hurtful
... are not hurtful. What two? Freedom from anger and acrimony ...
freedom from disdain and contempt ... freedom from jealousy and
stinginess ... freedom from deceit and deviousness ... conscience and
prudence. These are the two things that are not hurtful."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on Monastic Law  {#the-chapter-of-abbreviated-texts-on-monastic-law .unnumbered}

### N 2.280--309 *Vinayapeyyālavagga* {#n-2.280309-vinayapeyyālavagga .unnumbered}

#### 280  {#section-421 .unnumbered}

"For two reasons the Realized One laid down training rules for his
disciples.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ...
For keeping difficult persons in check and for the comfort of
good-hearted mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect this
life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ...
For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to
lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect this life and
protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For restraining
hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect
lives to come ... For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this
life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to
come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of
mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For inspiring confidence in those
without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it ... For the
continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training. These
are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down training rules for
his disciples."

#### 281--309  {#section-422 .unnumbered}

"For two reasons the Realized One laid down for his disciples the
monastic code ... the recitation of the monastic code ... the suspension
of the recitation of the monastic code ... the invitation to admonish
... the setting aside of the invitation to admonish ... the disciplinary
act of condemnation ... placing under dependence ... banishment ...
reconciliation ... debarment ... probation ... being sent back to the
beginning ... penance ... reinstatement ... restoration ... removal ...
ordination ... an act with a motion ... an act with a motion and one
announcement ... an act with a motion and three announcements ... laying
down what was not previously laid down ... amending what was laid down
... the settling of a disciplinary matter by the following methods:
face-to-face ... through recollection ... because of past insanity ...
acting according to what has been admitted ... majority decision ...
further penalty... covering over as if with grass.

What two? For the well-being and comfort of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} ...
For keeping difficult persons in check and for the comfort of
good-hearted mendicants ... For restraining defilements that affect this
life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to come ...
For restraining threats to this life and protecting against threats to
lives to come ... For restraining faults that affect this life and
protecting against faults that affect lives to come ... For restraining
hazards that affect this life and protecting against hazards that affect
lives to come ... For restraining unskillful qualities that affect this
life and protecting against unskillful qualities that affect lives to
come ... Out of sympathy for laypeople and for breaking up factions of
mendicants with corrupt wishes ... For inspiring confidence in those
without it, and increasing confidence in those who have it ... For the
continuation of the true teaching and the support of the training.

These are the two reasons why the Realized One laid down the settlement
of a disciplinary matter by covering over with grass for his disciples."

## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed  {#the-chapter-of-abbreviated-texts-beginning-with-greed .unnumbered}

### N 2.310--479 *Rāgapeyyālavagga* {#n-2.310479-rāgapeyyālavagga .unnumbered}

#### 310--319  {#section-423 .unnumbered}

"For insight into greed, two things should be developed. What two?
Serenity and discernment. For insight into greed, these two things
should be developed."

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, two things should be developed."

#### 320--479  {#section-424 .unnumbered}

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... two things should be developed. What two? Serenity and
discernment. For the letting go of negligence, these two things should
be developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE TWOS IS FINISHED.
:::

# The Book of the Threes  {#the-book-of-the-threes-1 .unnumbered}

::: center
*[the first fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Fools  {#the-chapter-on-fools-2 .unnumbered}

### N 3.1 Perils  *Bhayasutta* {#n-3.1-perils-bhayasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute. It's like a fire that spreads from a hut made of reeds
or grass, and burns down even a bungalow, plastered inside and out,
draft-free, with doors fastened and windows shuttered. In the same way,
whatever dangers there are, all come from the foolish, not from the
astute. Whatever perils there are, all come from the foolish, not from
the astute. Whatever hazards there are, all come from the foolish, not
from the astute.

So, the fool is dangerous, but the astute person is safe. The fool is
perilous, but the astute person is not. The fool is hazardous, but the
astute person is not. There's no danger, peril, or hazard that comes
from the astute.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.2 Characteristics  *Lakkhaṇasutta* {#n-3.2-characteristics-lakkhaṇasutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute person is
characterized by their deeds, for wisdom is made beautiful when it is
evident. A fool is known by three things. What three? Bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three things by which
a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three things by
which an astute person is known.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.3 Thinking  *Cintīsutta* {#n-3.3-thinking-cintīsutta .unnumbered}

"There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of a
fool. What three? A fool thinks poorly, speaks poorly, and acts poorly.
If a fool didn't think poorly, speak poorly, and act poorly, then how
would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an untrue
person'? But since a fool does think poorly, speak poorly, and act
poorly, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow is a fool, an
untrue person'. These are the three characteristics, signs, and
manifestations of a fool.

There are these three characteristics, signs, and manifestations of an
astute person. What three? An astute person thinks well, speaks well,
and acts well. If an astute person didn't think well, speak well, and
act well, then how would the astute know of them: 'This fellow is
astute, a true person'? But since an astute person does think well,
speak well, and act well, then the astute do know of them: 'This fellow
is astute, a true person'. These are the three characteristics, signs,
and manifestations of an astute person. So you should train ..."

### N 3.4 Mistakes  *Accayasutta* {#n-3.4-mistakes-accayasutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They don't recognize when
they've made a mistake. When they do recognize it they don't deal with
it properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they
don't accept it properly.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They recognize
when they've made a mistake. When they recognize it they deal with it
properly. And when someone else confesses a mistake to them, they accept
it properly.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

### N 3.5 Irrational  *Ayonisosutta* {#n-3.5-irrational-ayonisosutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? They ask a question
irrationally. They answer a question irrationally. And when someone else
answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they disagree with it.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? They ask a
question rationally. They answer a question rationally. And when someone
else answers a question rationally---with well-rounded, coherent, and
relevant words and phrases---they agree with it.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

### N 3.6 Unskillful  *Akusalasutta* {#n-3.6-unskillful-akusalasutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Unskillful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which a fool is known.

An astute person is known by three things. What three? Skillful deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind.

These are the three things by which an astute person is known. So you
should train ..."

### N 3.7 Blameworthy  *Sāvajjasutta* {#n-3.7-blameworthy-sāvajjasutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Blameworthy deeds by way
of body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by blameless
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.8 Hurtful  *Sabyābajjhasutta* {#n-3.8-hurtful-sabyābajjhasutta .unnumbered}

"A fool is known by three things. What three? Hurtful deeds by way of
body, speech, and mind. ... An astute person is known by kind deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things by which an
astute person is known.

So you should train like this: 'We will reject the three qualities by
which a fool is known, and we will undertake and follow the three
qualities by which an astute person is known.' That's how you should
train."

### N 3.9 Broken  *Khatasutta* {#n-3.9-broken-khatasutta .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent, untrue person has three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What
three? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has these three qualities they
keep themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What three?
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind.

When an astute, competent true person has these three qualities they
keep themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed
and criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

### N 3.10 Stains  *Malasutta* {#n-3.10-stains-malasutta .unnumbered}

"Anyone who has three qualities, and has not given up three stains, is
cast down to hell. What three? They're unethical, and haven't given up
the stain of immorality. They're jealous, and haven't given up the stain
of jealousy. They're stingy, and haven't given up the stain of
stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has not given up these three
stains, is cast down to hell.

Anyone who has three qualities, and has given up three stains, is raised
up to heaven. What three? They're ethical, and have given up the stain
of immorality. They're not jealous, and have given up the stain of
jealousy. They're not stingy, and have given up the stain of stinginess.

Anyone who has these three qualities, and has given up these three
stains, is raised up to heaven."

## The Chapter on the Chariot-maker  {#the-chapter-on-the-chariot-maker .unnumbered}

### N 3.11 Well-known  *Ñātasutta* {#n-3.11-well-known-ñātasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting
for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for
the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. What three? They
encourage deeds of body and speech, as well as principles, that don't
reinforce good qualities.

A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

A well-known mendicant who has three qualities is acting for the welfare
and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans. What three? They encourage deeds of
body and speech, as well as principles, that reinforce good qualities.

A well-known mendicant who has these three qualities is acting for the
welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit,
welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

### N 3.12 Commemoration  *Sāraṇīyasutta* {#n-3.12-commemoration-sāraṇīyasutta .unnumbered}

"An anointed aristocratic king should commemorate three places as long
as he lives. What three? The place he was born. This is the first place.

The place he was anointed as king. This is the second place.

The place where he won victory in battle, establishing himself as
foremost in battle. This is the third place. These are the three places
an anointed king should commemorate as long as he lives.

In the same way, a mendicant should commemorate three places as long as
they live. What three? The place where the mendicant shaved off their
hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life
to homelessness. This is the first place.

The place where the mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. This is the second place.

The place where the mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
third place. These are the three places a mendicant should commemorate
as long as they live."

### N 3.13 Hopes  *Āsaṁsasutta* {#n-3.13-hopes-āsaṁsasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? The hopeless,
the hopeful, and the one who has done away with hope. And what,
mendicants, is a hopeless person? It's when a person is reborn in a low
family---a family of corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters,
chariot-makers, or scavengers---poor, with little to eat or drink, where
life is tough, and food and shelter are hard to find. And they're ugly,
unsightly, deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or
half-paralyzed. They don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and
vehicles; garlands, fragrances, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting.
They hear this: 'They say the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat
named so-and-so as king.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will the
aristocrats anoint me too as king?' This is called a hopeless person.

And what, mendicants, is a hopeful person? It's when some person is the
eldest son of an anointed aristocratic king. He has not yet been
anointed, but is eligible, and has been confirmed in the succession. He
hears this: 'They say that the aristocrats have anointed the aristocrat
named so-and-so as king.' It occurs to him: 'Oh, when will the
aristocrats anoint me too as king?' This is called a hopeful person.

And what, mendicants, is a person who has done away with hope? It's when
a king has been anointed. He hears this: 'They say that the aristocrats
have anointed the aristocrat named so-and-so as king.' It never occurs
to him: 'Oh, when will the aristocrats anoint me too as king?' Why is
that? Because the former hope he had to be anointed has now died down.
This is called a person who has done away with hope.

These are the three people found in the world.

In the same way, these three people are found among the mendicants. What
three? The hopeless, the hopeful, and the one who has done away with
hope. And what, mendicants, is a hopeless person? It's when a person is
unethical, of bad qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior,
underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual practitioner---though claiming
to be one---rotten inside, festering, and depraved. They hear this:
'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will I too realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' This is called a hopeless person.

And what, mendicants, is a hopeful person? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, of good character. They hear this: 'They say that the mendicant
named so-and-so has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it with their
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' It occurs to them: 'Oh,
when will I too realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' This is called a hopeful
person.

And what, mendicants, is a person who has done away with hope? It's when
a mendicant is a perfected one, who has ended all defilements. They hear
this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has realized the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' It never occurs to them: 'Oh, when will I too realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and
live having realized it with my own insight due to the ending of
defilements.' Why is that? Because the former hope they had to be freed
has now died down. This is called a person who has done away with hope.

These are the three people found among the mendicants."

### N 3.14 The Wheel-Turning Monarch  *Cakkavattisutta* {#n-3.14-the-wheel-turning-monarch-cakkavattisutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king,
does not wield power without having their own king." When he said this,
one of the mendicants asked the Buddha:

"But who is the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and
principled king?"

"It is principle, monk," said the Buddha.

"Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for
his court, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and
authority.

He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals,
troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics
and brahmins, beasts and birds. When he has done this, he wields power
only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any
human enemy.

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security regarding bodily actions, relying only on principle---honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag,
banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily action should be cultivated.
This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated.'

Furthermore, a Realized One ... provides just protection and security
regarding verbal actions, saying: 'This kind of verbal action should be
cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be cultivated.' ...
And regarding mental actions: 'This kind of mental action should be
cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be cultivated.'

And when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
provided just protection and security regarding actions of body, speech,
and mind, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma. And that wheel
cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin or god or
[Māra]{lang="sa"} or divinity or by anyone in the world."

### N 3.15 About Pacetana  *Sacetanasutta* {#n-3.15-about-pacetana-sacetanasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Once upon a time there was a king named Pacetana. Then King Pacetana
addressed his chariot-maker, 'In six months' time, my good
chariot-maker, there will be a battle. Are you able to make me a new
pair of wheels?'

'I can, Your Majesty,' replied the chariot-maker. Then, when it was six
days less than six months later, the chariot-maker had finished one
wheel.

Then King Pacetana addressed his chariot-maker, 'In six days' time there
will be a battle. Is my new pair of wheels finished?'

'Now that it is six days less than six months, Your Majesty, I have
finished one wheel.'

'Are you able to finish the second wheel in these six days?'

Saying, 'I can, Your Majesty,' the chariot-maker finished the second
wheel in six days. Taking the pair of wheels he went up to King
Pacetana, and said this to the king, 'Your Majesty, these are your two
new wheels, finished.'

'But, my good chariot-maker, what is the difference between the wheel
that was finished in six days less than six months, and the wheel
finished in just six days? Because I can't see any difference between
them.'

'But, Your Majesty, there is a difference. See now what it is.'

Then the chariot-maker rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in
six days. It rolled as far as the original impetus took it, then wobbled
and fell down. Then he rolled forth the wheel that had been finished in
six days less than six months. It rolled as far as the original impetus
took it, then stood still as if fixed to an axle.

'But what is the cause, my good chariot-maker, what is the reason why
the wheel that was finished in six days wobbled and fell, while the one
that was finished in six days less than six months stood still as if
fixed to an axle?'

'The wheel that was finished in six days, Your Majesty, is crooked,
flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub. That's why it wobbled and
fell. The wheel that was finished in six days less than six months, Your
Majesty, is not crooked, flawed, and defective in rim, spoke, and hub.
That's why it stood still as if fixed to an axle.'

Now, mendicants, you might think: 'Surely that chariot-maker must have
been someone else at that time?' But you should not see it like that. I
myself was the chariot-maker at that time. Then I was skilled in the
crooks, flaws, and defects of wood.

Now that I am a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, I am skilled in
the crooks, flaws, and defects of actions by body, speech, and mind.
Whatever monk or nun has not given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of
body, speech, and mind has fallen from the teaching and training, just
like the wheel that was finished in six days.

Whatever monk or nun has given up the crooks, flaws, and defects of
body, speech, and mind is established in the teaching and training, just
like the wheel that was finished in six days less than six months.

So you should train like this: 'We will give up the crooks, flaws, and
defects of body, speech, and mind.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.16 Unfailing  *Apaṇṇakasutta* {#n-3.16-unfailing-apaṇṇakasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has three things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What three? It's when a mendicant guards the sense doors, eats in
moderation, and is dedicated to wakefulness.

And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors? When a mendicant sees a
sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight,
and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how a mendicant
guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant eat in moderation? It's when a mendicant
reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' That's
how a mendicant eats in moderation.

And how is a mendicant dedicated to wakefulness? It's when a mendicant
practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind
from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle watch, they lie
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.
In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and
sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. This is how a
mendicant is dedicated to wakefulness.

When a mendicant has these three things their practice is unfailing, and
they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements."

### N 3.17 Hurting Yourself  *Attabyābādhasutta* {#n-3.17-hurting-yourself-attabyābādhasutta .unnumbered}

"These three things, mendicants, lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, and hurting both. What three? Bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind.

These are three things that lead to hurting yourself, hurting others,
and hurting both.

These three things, mendicants, don't lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, or hurting both. What three? Good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind.

These are three things that don't lead to hurting yourself, hurting
others, or hurting both."

### N 3.18 The Realm of the Gods  *Devalokasutta* {#n-3.18-the-realm-of-the-gods-devalokasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverend, do you lead the spiritual life with the ascetic Gotama so
that you can be reborn in the realm of the gods?' Being questioned like
this, wouldn't you be horrified, repelled, and disgusted?"

"Yes, sir."

"So it seems that you are horrified, repelled, and disgusted by heavenly
lifespan, beauty, happiness, glory, and sovereignty. How much more then
should you be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted by bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind."

### N 3.19 A Shopkeeper (1st)  *Paṭhamapāpaṇikasutta* {#n-3.19-a-shopkeeper-1st-paṭhamapāpaṇikasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors is unable to acquire
more wealth or to increase the wealth they've already acquired. What
three? It's when a shopkeeper doesn't carefully focus on their work in
the morning, at midday, and in the afternoon. A shopkeeper who has these
three factors is unable to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth
they've already acquired.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is unable to
acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities
they've already acquired. What three? It's when a mendicant doesn't
carefully focus on a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the
morning, at midday, and in the afternoon.

A mendicant who has these three qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired.

A shopkeeper who has three factors is able to acquire more wealth or to
increase the wealth they've already acquired. What three? It's when a
shopkeeper carefully focuses on their work in the morning, at midday,
and in the afternoon. A shopkeeper who has these three factors is able
to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth they've already
acquired.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities is able to acquire
more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've
already acquired. What three? It's when a mendicant carefully focuses on
a meditation subject as a basis of immersion in the morning, at midday,
and in the afternoon.

A mendicant who has these three qualities is able to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired."

### N 3.20 A Shopkeeper (2nd)  *Dutiyapāpaṇikasutta* {#n-3.20-a-shopkeeper-2nd-dutiyapāpaṇikasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a shopkeeper who has three factors soon acquires great and
abundant wealth. What three? It's when a shopkeeper sees clearly, is
indefatigable, and has supporters.

And how does a shopkeeper see clearly? It's when a shopkeeper knows of a
product: 'This product is bought at this price and is selling at this
price. With this much investment, it'll bring this much profit.' That's
how a shopkeeper sees clearly.

And how is a shopkeeper indefatigable? It's when a shopkeeper is skilled
in buying and selling products. That's how a shopkeeper is
indefatigable.

And how does a shopkeeper have supporters? It's when rich, affluent, and
wealthy householders or householders' children know of him: 'This good
shopkeeper sees clearly and is indefatigable. They are capable of
providing for their wives and children, and paying us back from time to
time.' They deposit money with the shopkeeper, saying: 'With this,
friend shopkeeper, earn money to provide for your wives and children,
and pay us back from time to time.' That's how a shopkeeper has
supporters.

A shopkeeper who has these three factors soon acquires great and
abundant wealth.

In the same way, a mendicant who has three qualities soon acquires great
and abundant skillful qualities. What three? It's when a mendicant sees
clearly, is indefatigable, and has supporters.

And how does a mendicant see clearly? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant sees
clearly.

And how is a mendicant indefatigable? It's when a mendicant lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking
off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a
mendicant is indefatigable.

And how does a mendicant have supporters? It's when from time to time a
mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors
of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and
the outlines---and asks them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a mendicant has supporters.

A mendicant who has these three qualities soon acquires great and
abundant skillful qualities."

## The Chapter on Persons  {#the-chapter-on-persons-1 .unnumbered}

### N 3.21 With Saviṭṭha  *Samiddhasutta* {#n-3.21-with-saviṭṭha-samiddhasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s
monastery.

Then Venerable [Saviṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and Venerable
[Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"} went up to Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"},
and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side and Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said to Venerable
[Saviṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, "Reverend [Saviṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, these three
people are found in the world. What three? The direct witness, the one
attained to view, and the one freed by faith. These are the three people
found in the world. Of these three people, who do you believe to be the
finest?"

"Reverend [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, these three people are found in the
world. What three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the
one freed by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of
these three people, I believe the person freed by faith to be finest.
Why is that? Because this person's faculty of faith is outstanding."

Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said to [Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"}, "Reverend
[Koṭṭhika]{lang="sa"}, these three people are found in the world. What
three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed
by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of these three
people, who do you believe to be the finest?"

"Reverend [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, these three people are found in the
world. What three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the
one freed by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of
these three people, I believe the direct witness to be finest. Why is
that? Because this person's faculty of immersion is outstanding."

Then [Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"} said to [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, "Reverend
[Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, these three people are found in the world. What
three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the one freed
by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of these three
people, who do you believe to be the finest?"

"Reverend [Koṭṭhika]{lang="sa"}, these three people are found in the
world. What three? The direct witness, the one attained to view, and the
one freed by faith. These are the three people found in the world. Of
these three people, I believe the person attained to view to be finest.
Why is that? Because this person's faculty of wisdom is outstanding."

Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} said to [Saviṭṭha]{lang="sa"} and
[Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"}, "Each of us has spoken from the heart. Come,
reverends, let's go to the Buddha, and tell him about this. As he
answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"},
[Saviṭṭha]{lang="sa"}, and [Mahākoṭṭhita]{lang="sa"} went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}
told the Buddha of all they had discussed.

"In this matter, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, it's not easy to categorically
declare that one of these three people is finest. In some cases, a
person who is freed by faith is practicing for perfection, while the
direct witness and the one attained to view are once-returners or
non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest. In some cases, a direct witness is practicing
for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the one attained to
view are once-returners or non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest. In some cases, one attained to view is
practicing for perfection, while the one freed by faith and the direct
witness are once-returners or non-returners.

In this matter, it's not easy to categorically declare that one of these
three people is finest."

### N 3.22 Patients  *Gilānasutta* {#n-3.22-patients-gilānasutta .unnumbered}

"These three patients are found in the world. What three?

In some cases a patient won't recover from an illness, regardless of
whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable
carer.

In some cases a patient will recover from an illness, regardless of
whether or not they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable
carer.

In some cases a patient can recover from an illness, but only if they
get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer, and not if they
don't get these things.

Now, it's for the sake of the last patient---who will recover only if
they get suitable food and medicines, and a capable carer---that food,
medicines, and a carer are prescribed. But also, for the sake of this
patient, the other patients should be looked after.

These are the three kinds of patients found in the world.

In the same way, these three people similar to patients are found in the
world. What three? Some people don't enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities, regardless of whether or not they get to see a
Realized One, and to hear the teaching and training that he proclaims.

Some people do enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities,
regardless of whether or not they get to see a Realized One, and to hear
the teaching and training that he proclaims.

Some people can enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities,
but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to hear the teaching and
training that he proclaims, and not when they don't get those things.

Now, it's for the sake of this last person that teaching the Dhamma is
prescribed, that is, the one who can enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities, but only if they get to see a Realized One, and to
hear the teaching and training that he proclaims. But also, for the sake
of this person, the other people should be taught Dhamma.

These are the three people similar to patients found in the world."

### N 3.23 Choices  *Saṅkhārasutta* {#n-3.23-choices-saṅkhārasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three?

Firstly, a certain person makes hurtful choices by way of body, speech,
and mind. Having made these choices, they're reborn in a hurtful world,
where hurtful contacts strike them. Touched by hurtful contacts, they
experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively painful---like the
beings in hell.

Furthermore, another person makes pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are reborn in a
pleasing world, where pleasing contacts strike them. Touched by pleasing
contacts, they experience pleasing feelings of perfect happiness---like
the gods of universal beauty.

Furthermore, another person makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by
way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are
reborn in a world that is both hurtful and pleasing, where hurtful and
pleasing contacts strike them. Touched by both hurtful and pleasing
contacts, they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a
mixture of pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings
in the underworld.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.24 Very Helpful  *Bahukārasutta* {#n-3.24-very-helpful-bahukārasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three people are very helpful to another. What three?

The person who has enabled you to go for refuge to the Buddha, the
teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. This person is very helpful to
another.

Furthermore, the person who has enabled you to truly understand: 'This
is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This person is very helpful to another.

Furthermore, the person who has enabled you to realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with your own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This person is very helpful to another.

These are the three people who are very helpful to another person.

And I say that there is no-one more helpful to another than these three
people. And I also say that it's not easy to repay these three people by
bowing down to them, rising up for them, greeting them with joined
palms, and observing proper etiquette for them; or by providing them
with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick."

### N 3.25 Like Diamond  *Vajirūpamasutta* {#n-3.25-like-diamond-vajirūpamasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? A person with a
mind like an open sore, a person with a mind like lightning, and a
person with a mind like diamond.

And who has a mind like an open sore? It's a person who is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. They're like a festering sore, which, when you hit
it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. In the same way, a
person is irritable and bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they
lose their temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they
display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. This is called a person with a
mind like an open sore.

And who has a mind like lightning? It's a person who truly understands:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. They're like a person with keen eyes in the
dark of the night, who sees by a flash of lightning. In the same way, a
person truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called a
person with a mind like lightning.

And who has a mind like diamond? It's a person who realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. It's like a diamond, which can't be cut by anything at all,
not even a gem or a stone. In the same way, a person realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. ...
This is called a person with a mind like diamond.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.26 Associates  *Sevitabbasutta* {#n-3.26-associates-sevitabbasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? There is a
person you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend. There is a
person you should associate with, accompany, and attend. There is a
person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with honor and
respect.

Who is the person you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend?
It's a person who is inferior in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom.
You shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend such a person, except
out of kindness and sympathy.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? It's
a person who is similar in terms of ethics, immersion, and wisdom. You
should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person. Why is that?
Thinking, 'Since our ethical conduct is similar, we can discuss ethics,
the conversation will flow, and we'll both be at ease. Since our
immersion is similar, we can discuss immersion, the conversation will
flow, and we'll both be at ease. Since our wisdom is similar, we can
discuss wisdom, the conversation will flow, and we'll both be at ease.'
That's why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a
person.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend with
honor and respect? It's a person who is superior in terms of ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. You should associate with, accompany, and attend
such a person with honor and respect. Why is that? Thinking, 'I'll
fulfill the entire spectrum of ethical conduct I haven't yet fulfilled,
or support with wisdom in every situation the ethical conduct I've
already fulfilled. I'll fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion I
haven't yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every situation the
immersion I've already fulfilled. I'll fulfill the entire spectrum of
wisdom I haven't yet fulfilled, or support with wisdom in every
situation the wisdom I've already fulfilled.' That's why you should
associate with, accompany, and attend this person with honor and
respect.

These are the three people found in the world.

> A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill,\
> but associating with an equal, you'll never decline;\
> following the best, you'll quickly rise up,\
> so you should keep company\
> \>with people better than you."

### N 3.27 You Should be Disgusted  *Jigucchitabbasutta* {#n-3.27-you-should-be-disgusted-jigucchitabbasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? There is a
person who you should be disgusted by, and you shouldn't associate with,
accompany, or attend them. There is a person you should regard with
equanimity, and you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them.
There is a person you should associate with, accompany, and attend.

Who is the person you should be disgusted by, and not associate with,
accompany, or attend? It's a person who is unethical, of bad qualities,
filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or
spiritual practitioner---though claiming to be one---rotten inside,
festering, and depraved. You should be disgusted by such a person, and
you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them. Why is that?
Even if you don't follow the example of such a person, you still get a
bad reputation: 'That individual has bad friends, companions, and
associates.' They're like a snake that's been living in a pile of dung.
Even if it doesn't bite, it'll still rub off on you. In the same way,
even if you don't follow the example of such a person, you still get a
bad reputation: 'That individual has bad friends, companions, and
associates.' That's why you should be disgusted by such a person, and
you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them.

Who is the person you should regard with equanimity, and not associate
with, accompany, or attend? It's a person who is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. They're like a festering sore, which, when you hit
it with a stick or a stone, discharges even more. In the same way,
someone is irritable and bad-tempered. They're like a firebrand of
pale-moon ebony, which, when you hit it with a stick or a stone, sizzles
and crackles even more. In the same way, someone is irritable and
bad-tempered. They're like a sewer, which, when you stir it with a stick
or a stone, stinks even more. In the same way, a person is irritable and
bad-tempered. Even when lightly criticized they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and they display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. You should regard such a person with equanimity,
and you shouldn't associate with, accompany, or attend them. Why is
that? Thinking, 'They might abuse or insult me, or do me harm.' That's
why you should regard such a person with equanimity, and you shouldn't
associate with, accompany, or attend them.

Who is the person you should associate with, accompany, and attend? It's
a person who is ethical, of good character. You should associate with,
accompany, and attend such a person. Why is that? Even if you don't
follow the example of such a person, you still get a good reputation:
'That individual has good friends, companions, and associates.' That's
why you should associate with, accompany, and attend such a person.

These are the three people found in the world.

> A man who associates with an inferior goes downhill,\
> but associating with an equal, you'll never decline;\
> following the best, you'll quickly rise up,\
> so you should keep company\
> \>with people better than you."

### N 3.28 Speech like Dung  *Gūthabhāṇīsutta* {#n-3.28-speech-like-dung-gūthabhāṇīsutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? One with speech
like dung, one with speech like flowers, and one with speech like honey.

And who has speech like dung? It's a person who is summoned to a
council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court,
and asked to bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not
knowing, they say 'I know.' Knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Not
seeing, they say 'I see.' And seeing, they say 'I don't see.' So they
deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for some
trivial worldly reason. This is called a person with speech like dung.

And who has speech like flowers? It's a person who is summoned to a
council, an assembly, a family meeting, a guild, or to the royal court,
and asked to bear witness: 'Please, mister, say what you know.' Not
knowing, they say 'I don't know.' Knowing, they say 'I know.' Not
seeing, they say 'I don't see.' And seeing, they say 'I see.' So they
don't deliberately lie for the sake of themselves or another, or for
some trivial worldly reason. This is called a person with speech like
flowers.

And who has speech like honey? It's a person who gives up harsh speech.
They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to
the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to the people. This is called a
person with speech like honey.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.29 Blind  *Andhasutta* {#n-3.29-blind-andhasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? The blind, the
one-eyed, and the two-eyed.

Who is the blind person? It's someone who doesn't have the kind of
vision that's needed to acquire more wealth or to increase the wealth
they've already acquired. Nor do they have the kind of vision that's
needed to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and
unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those
on the side of dark and bright. This is called a blind person.

Who is the person with one eye? It's someone who has the kind of vision
that's needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they've
already acquired. But they don't have the kind of vision that's needed
to know the difference between qualities that are skillful and
unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those
on the side of dark and bright. This is called a one-eyed person.

Who is the person with two eyes? It's someone who has the kind of vision
that's needed to acquire more wealth and to increase the wealth they've
already acquired. And they have the kind of vision that's needed to know
the difference between skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and
blameless, inferior and superior, or qualities on the side of dark and
bright. This is called a two-eyed person.

These are the three people found in the world.

> Neither suitable wealth,\
> nor merit do they make.\
> They hold a losing hand on both counts,\
> those who are blind, with ruined eyes.
>
> And now the one-eyed\
> person is explained.\
> By methods good and bad,\
> that devious person seeks wealth.
>
> Both by fraudulent, thieving deeds,\
> and also by lies,\
> the young man's skilled at piling up money,\
> and enjoying sensual pleasures.\
> From here they go to hell---\
> the one-eyed person is ruined.
>
> And now the two-eyed is explained,\
> the best individual.\
> Their wealth is earned legitimately,\
> money acquired by their own hard work.
>
> They give with best of intentions,\
> that peaceful-hearted person.\
> They go to a good place,\
> where there is no sorrow.
>
> The blind and the one-eyed,\
> you should avoid from afar.\
> But you should keep the two-eyed close,\
> the best individual."

### N 3.30 Upside-down  *Avakujjasutta* {#n-3.30-upside-down-avakujjasutta .unnumbered}

"These three people are found in the world. What three? One with
upside-down wisdom, one with wisdom on their lap, and one with
widespread wisdom.

And who is the person with upside-down wisdom? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. But even while sitting there, that person doesn't apply the
mind to the beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. And when they
get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning,
middle, or end of the discussion. It's like when a pot full of water is
tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn't stay. In the same way,
a person often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the
presence of the mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good
in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful
and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure. But even while sitting there, that person doesn't apply
the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, or end. And when
they get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning,
middle, or end of the discussion. This is called a person with
upside-down wisdom.

And who is the person with wisdom on their lap? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. But when they get up from
their seat, they don't apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or end
of the discussion. It's like a person who has different kinds of food
crammed on their lap---such as sesame, rice, sweets, or jujube---so that
if they get up from the seat without mindfulness, everything gets
scattered. In the same way, a person often goes to the monastery to hear
the teaching in the presence of the mendicants. The mendicants teach
them Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual
practice that's entirely full and pure. While sitting there, that person
applies the mind to the discussion in the beginning, middle, and end.
But when they get up from their seat, they don't apply the mind to the
beginning, middle, or end of the discussion. This is called a person
with wisdom on their lap.

And who is the person with widespread wisdom? It's a person who often
goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence of the
mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. And when they get up from
their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or
end of the discussion. It's like when a pot full of water is set
straight, so the water stays and doesn't drain out. In the same way, a
person often goes to the monastery to hear the teaching in the presence
of the mendicants. The mendicants teach them Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And they reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. While sitting there, that person applies the mind to the
discussion in the beginning, middle, and end. And when they get up from
their seat, they continue to apply the mind to the beginning, middle, or
end of the discussion. This is called a person with widespread wisdom.

These are the three people found in the world.

> A person with upside-down wisdom,\
> is a simpleton and cannot see,\
> and even if they frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can't learn\
> the beginning, middle, or end\
> of the discussion,\
> for their wisdom is lacking.
>
> The person with wisdom on their lap\
> is better than that, it's said;\
> but even if they frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can only learn\
> the beginning, middle, and end\
> while sitting in that seat;\
> but they've only grasped the phrasing,\
> for when they get up their understanding fails,\
> and what they've learned is lost.
>
> The person with widespread wisdom\
> is better than that, it's said;\
> and if they, too, frequently\
> go into the mendicants' presence,
>
> such a person can learn\
> the beginning, middle, and end\
> while sitting in that seat;\
> and when they've grasped the phrasing,
>
> they remember it with the best of intentions.\
> That peaceful-hearted person,\
> practicing in line with the teaching,\
> would make an end of suffering."

## The Chapter on Messengers of the Gods  {#the-chapter-on-messengers-of-the-gods .unnumbered}

### N 3.31 With Divinity  *Sabrahmakasutta* {#n-3.31-with-divinity-sabrahmakasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their
home is said to live with divinity. A family where the children honor
their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors. A
family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to
live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.

'Divinity' is a term for your parents.

'First tutors' is a term for your parents.

'Worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods' is a term for your parents.

Why is that? Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise
them, nurture them, and show them the world.

> Parents are said to be 'divinity'\
> and 'first tutors', it's said.\
> They're worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods\
> \>from their children,\
> for they love their offspring.
>
> Therefore an astute person\
> would revere them and honor them\
> with food and drink,\
> clothes and bedding,\
> anointing and bathing,\
> and by washing their feet.
>
> Because they look after\
> their parents like this,\
> in this life they're praised by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

### N 3.32 With Ānanda  *Ānandasutta* {#n-3.32-with-ānanda-ānandasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such
that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit
for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying
tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd live
having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more?"

"It could be, Ānanda, that a mendicant gains a state of immersion such
that they have no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd
live having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more."

"But how could this be, sir?"

"Ānanda, it's when a mendicant thinks: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.'

That's how, Ānanda, a mendicant might gain a state of immersion such
that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit
for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying
tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and that they'd live
having achieved the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more.

And Ānanda, this is what I was referring to in 'The Way to the Far
Shore', in 'The Questions of [Puṇṇaka]{lang="sa"}' when I said:

> 'Having appraised the world high and low,\
> there is nothing in the world that disturbs them.\
> Peaceful, unclouded, untroubled,\
> \>with no need for hope---\
> they've crossed over rebirth and old age, I declare.'"

### N 3.33 With Sāriputta  *Sāriputtasutta* {#n-3.33-with-sāriputta-sāriputtasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Maybe I'll teach Dhamma
in brief, maybe in detail, maybe both in brief and in detail. But it's
hard to find anyone who understands."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
teach Dhamma in brief, in detail, and both in brief and in detail. There
will be those who understand the teaching!"

"So, [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, you should train like this: 'There'll be no
I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this
conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for all external stimuli; and we'll live having achieved the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where I-making, mine-making, and
the underlying tendency to conceit are no more.' That's how you should
train.

When a mendicant has no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body; and no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for all external stimuli; and they live
having attained the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit are no
more---they're called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the
fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering.

And [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}, this is what I was referring to in 'The Way
to the Far Shore', in 'The Questions of Udaya' when I said:

> 'The giving up of both\
> sensual desires and displeasures,\
> the dispelling of dullness,\
> and the prevention of remorse;
>
> pure equanimity and mindfulness,\
> preceded by investigation of principles---\
> this, I declare, is liberation by enlightenment,\
> the smashing of ignorance.'"

### N 3.34 Sources  *Nidānasutta* {#n-3.34-sources-nidānasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.

Any deed that emerges from greed---born, sourced, and originated from
greed---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from hate---born, sourced, and originated from
hate---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that deed
ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or in
the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from delusion---born, sourced, and originated from
delusion---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile,
and well-kept. They're sown in a well-prepared, productive field, and
the heavens provide plenty of rain. Then those seeds would grow,
increase, and mature.

In the same way, any deed that emerges from greed---born, sourced, and
originated from greed---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And
wherever that deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the
present life, or in the next life, or in some subsequent period.

Any deed that emerges from hate ...

Any deed that emerges from delusion---born, sourced, and originated from
delusion---ripens where that new incarnation is born. And wherever that
deed ripens, its result is experienced---either in the present life, or
in the next life, or in some subsequent period. These are three sources
that give rise to deeds.

Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise
to deeds.

Any deed that emerges from contentment---born, sourced, and originated
from contentment---is given up when greed is done away with. It's cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future.

Any deed that emerges from love---born, sourced, and originated from
love---is abandoned when hate is done away with. It's cut off at the
root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the
future.

Any deed that emerges from understanding---born, sourced, and originated
from understanding---is abandoned when delusion is done away with. It's
cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future.

Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not damaged by wind and sun,
fertile, and well-kept. But someone would burn them with fire, reduce
them to ashes, and sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream. Then those seeds would be cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

In the same way, any deed that emerges from contentment---born, sourced,
and originated from contentment---is abandoned when greed is done away
with. It's cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and
unable to arise in the future.

Any deed that emerges from love ... Any deed that emerges from
understanding---born, sourced, and originated from understanding---is
abandoned when delusion is done away with. It's cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

> When an ignorant person acts\
> out of greed, hate, or delusion,\
> any deeds they have done,\
> a little or a lot,\
> are to be experienced right here,\
> not in any other place.
>
> So a wise person,\
> a mendicant arousing knowledge\
> of the outcome of greed, hate, and delusion,\
> would cast off all bad destinies."

### N 3.35 With Hatthaka  *Hatthakasutta* {#n-3.35-with-hatthaka-hatthakasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Āḷavī]{lang="sa"}, on a mat of leaves by a cow-path in a grove of
Indian Rosewood.

Then as Hatthaka of [Āḷavī]{lang="sa"} was going for a walk he saw the
Buddha sitting on that mat of leaves. He went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said, "Sir, I trust the Buddha slept well?"

"Yes, prince, I slept well. I am one of those who sleep at ease in the
world."

"The winter nights are cold, sir, and it's the week of mid-winter, when
the snow falls. Rough is the ground trampled under the cows' hooves, and
thin is the mat of leaves. The leaves are sparse on the trees, the ocher
robes are cold, and cold blows the north wind. And yet the Buddha says,
'Yes, prince, I slept well. I am one of those who sleep at ease in the
world.'"

"Well then, prince, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think? Take the case of a householder or
his son, who lives in a bungalow, plastered inside and out, draft-free,
with door fastened and window shuttered. His couch is spread with woolen
covers---shag-piled, pure white, or embroidered with flowers---and
spread with a fine deer hide. It has a canopy above and red pillows at
both ends. An oil lamp is burning there, while his four wives attend to
him in all manner of agreeable ways. What do you think, prince, would he
sleep at ease, or not? Or how do you see this?"

"He would sleep at ease, sir. Of those who sleep at ease in the world,
he would be one."

"What do you think, prince? Is it not possible that a fever born of
greed---physical or mental---might arise in that householder or
householder's son, burning him so he sleeps badly?"

"Yes, sir."

"The greed that burns that householder or householder's son, making them
sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made like
a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future. That's why
I sleep at ease.

What do you think, prince? Is it not possible that a fever born of hate
... or a fever born of delusion---physical or mental---might arise in
that householder or householder's son, burning him so he sleeps badly?"

"Yes, sir."

"The delusion that burns that householder or householder's son, making
them sleep badly, has been cut off at the root by the Realized One, made
like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
That's why I sleep at ease.

> A brahmin who is fully quenched\
> always sleeps at ease.\
> Sensual pleasures slip off them,\
> they're cooled, free of attachments.
>
> Since they've cut off all clinging,\
> and removed the stress from the heart,\
> the peaceful sleep at ease,\
> having found peace of mind."

### N 3.36 Messengers of the Gods  *Devadūtasutta* {#n-3.36-messengers-of-the-gods-devadūtasutta .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these three messengers of the gods. What three?

Firstly, someone does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. The wardens of hell take them by the
arms and present them to King Yama, saying: 'Your Majesty, this person
did not pay due respect to their mother and father, ascetics and
brahmins, or honor the elders in the family. May Your Majesty punish
them!'

Then King Yama pursues, presses, and grills them about the first
messenger of the gods: 'Mister, did you not see the first messenger of
the gods that appeared among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings an
elderly woman or a man---eighty, ninety, or a hundred years old---bent
double, crooked, leaning on a staff, trembling as they walk, ailing,
past their prime, with teeth broken, hair grey and scanty or bald, skin
wrinkled, and limbs blotchy?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to grow old. I'm not exempt
from old age. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Indeed, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the second messenger of the gods:
'Mister, did you not see the second messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.' King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you
not see among human beings a woman or a man, sick, suffering, gravely
ill, collapsed in their own urine and feces, being picked up by some and
put down by others?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to become sick. I'm not exempt
from sickness. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

Then King Yama grills them about the third messenger of the gods:
'Mister, did you not see the third messenger of the gods that appeared
among human beings?'

They say, 'I saw nothing, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did you not see among human beings a
woman or a man, dead for one, two, or three days, bloated, livid, and
festering?'

They say, 'I saw that, sir.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, did it not occur to you---being
sensible and mature---"I, too, am liable to die. I'm not exempt from
death. I'd better do good by way of body, speech, and mind"?'

They say, 'I couldn't, sir. I was negligent.'

King Yama says to them, 'Mister, because you were negligent, you didn't
do good by way of body, speech, and mind. Well, they'll definitely
punish you to fit your negligence. That bad deed wasn't done by your
mother, father, brother, or sister. It wasn't done by friends and
colleagues, by relatives and kin, by the deities, or by ascetics and
brahmins. That bad deed was done by you alone, and you alone will
experience the result.'

After grilling them about the third messenger of the gods, King Yama
falls silent. The wardens of hell punish them with the five-fold
crucifixion. They drive red-hot stakes through the hands and feet, and
another in the middle of the chest. And there they suffer painful,
sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they don't die until that bad deed
is eliminated.

The wardens of hell throw them down and hack them with axes. ...

They hang them upside-down and hack them with hatchets. ...

They harness them to a chariot, and drive them back and forth across
burning ground, blazing and glowing. ...

They make them climb up and down a huge mountain of burning coals,
blazing and glowing. ...

The wardens of hell turn them upside down and throw them in a red-hot
copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing. There they're seared in
boiling scum, and they're swept up and down and round and round. And
there they suffer painful, sharp, severe, acute feelings---but they
don't die until that bad deed is eliminated. The wardens of hell toss
them into the Great Hell.

Now, about that Great Hell:

> 'Four are its corners, four its doors,\
> neatly divided in equal parts.\
> Surrounded by an iron wall,\
> of iron is its roof.
>
> The ground is even made of iron,\
> it burns with fierce fire.\
> The heat forever radiates\
> a hundred leagues around.'

Once upon a time, King Yama thought, 'Those who do such bad deeds in the
world receive these many different punishments. Oh, I hope I may be
reborn as a human being! And that a Realized One---a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha---arises in the world! And that I may pay homage
to the Buddha! Then the Buddha can teach me Dhamma, so that I may
understand his teaching.'

Now, I don't say this because I've heard it from some other ascetic or
brahmin. I only say it because I've known, seen, and realized it for
myself.

> When warned by the gods' messengers,\
> those people who are negligent\
> sorrow for a long time\
> when they go to that wretched place.
>
> When warned by the gods' messengers,\
> the good and true persons here,\
> never neglect\
> the teaching of the Noble One.
>
> Seeing the peril in grasping,\
> the origin of birth and death,\
> the unattached are freed\
> with the ending of birth and death.
>
> Happy, they've come to a safe place,\
> quenched in this very life.\
> They've gone beyond all threats and perils,\
> and risen above all suffering."

### N 3.37 The Four Great Kings (1st)  *Catumahārājasutta* {#n-3.37-the-four-great-kings-1st-catumahārājasutta .unnumbered}

"On the eighth day of the fortnight, mendicants, the ministers and
councillors of the four great kings wander about the world, thinking:
'Hopefully most humans are paying due respect to their parents, ascetics
and brahmins, honoring the elders in their families, observing and
keeping vigil on the sabbath, and making merit.'

And on the fourteenth day of the fortnight, the sons of the four great
kings wander about the world, thinking: 'Hopefully most humans are
paying due respect to their parents ... and making merit.'

And on the fifteenth day sabbath, the four great kings themselves wander
about the world, thinking: 'Hopefully most humans are paying due respect
to their parents ... and making merit.'

If only a few humans are paying due respect to their parents ... and
making merit, the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three,
seated together in the Hall of Justice: 'Only a few humans are paying
due respect to their parents ... and making merit.' Then the gods of the
thirty-three are disappointed, thinking, 'The heavenly hosts will
dwindle, while the titan hosts will swell!'

But if many humans are paying due respect to their parents ... and
making merit, the four great kings address the gods of the thirty-three,
seated together in the Hall of Justice: 'Many humans are paying due
respect to their parents ... and making merit.' Then the gods of the
thirty-three are pleased, thinking, 'The heavenly hosts will swell,
while the titan hosts will dwindle!'

Once upon a time, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of the
thirty-three, recited this verse:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung;
poorly spoken, not well spoken. Why is that? Sakka, lord of gods, is not
free of greed, hate, and delusion.

But for a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---it is
appropriate to say:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath,\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

Why is that? Because that mendicant is free of greed, hate, and
delusion."

### N 3.38 The Four Great Kings (2nd)  *Dutiyacatumahārājasutta* {#n-3.38-the-four-great-kings-2nd-dutiyacatumahārājasutta .unnumbered}

"Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, guiding the gods of
the thirty-three, recited this verse:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

But that verse was poorly sung by Sakka, lord of gods, not well sung;
poorly spoken, not well spoken. Why is that? Because Sakka, lord of
gods, is not exempt from rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is not exempt from
suffering, I say.

But for a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---it is
appropriate to say:

> 'Whoever wants to be like me\
> would observe the sabbath,\
> complete in all eight factors,\
> on the fourteenth and the fifteenth days,\
> and the eighth day of the fortnight,\
> as well as on the fortnightly special displays.'

Why is that? Because that mendicant is exempt from rebirth, old age, and
death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. He is
exempt from suffering, I say."

### N 3.39 A Delicate Lifestyle  *Sukhumālasutta* {#n-3.39-a-delicate-lifestyle-sukhumālasutta .unnumbered}

"My lifestyle was delicate, mendicants, most delicate, extremely
delicate.

In my father's home, lotus ponds were made just for me. In some, blue
water lilies blossomed, while in others, there were pink or white
lotuses, just for my benefit. I only used sandalwood from
[Kāsi]{lang="sa"}, and my turbans, jackets, sarongs, and upper robes
also came from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}. And a white parasol was held over me
night and day, with the thought: 'Don't let cold, heat, grass, dust, or
damp bother him.'

I had three stilt longhouses---one for the winter, one for the summer,
and one for the rainy season. I stayed in a stilt longhouse without
coming downstairs for the four months of the rainy season, where I was
entertained by musicians---none of them men.

While the bondservants, workers, and staff in other houses are given
rough gruel with pickles to eat, in my father's home they are given fine
rice with meat.

Amid such prosperity and such a delicate lifestyle, I thought: 'When an
unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to grow old, not being exempt
from old age---sees someone else who is old, they're horrified,
repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are
in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to grow old, it would
not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted,
when I see someone else who is old.' Reflecting like this, I entirely
gave up the vanity of youth.

'When an unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to get sick, not
being exempt from sickness---sees someone else who is sick, they're
horrified, repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they
themselves are in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to get
sick, it would not be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed,
and disgusted, when I see someone else who is sick.' Reflecting like
this, I entirely gave up the vanity of health.

'When an unlearned ordinary person---who is liable to die, not being
exempt from death---sees someone else who is dead, they're horrified,
repelled, and disgusted, overlooking the fact that they themselves are
in the same situation. But since I, too, am liable to die, it would not
be appropriate for me to be horrified, embarrassed, and disgusted, when
I see someone else who is dead.' Reflecting like this, I entirely gave
up the vanity of life.

There are these three vanities. What three? The vanity of youth, of
health, and of life.

Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, an unlearned ordinary person does
bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Intoxicated with the vanity of health ...

Intoxicated with the vanity of life, an unlearned ordinary person does
bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

Intoxicated with the vanity of youth, health, or life, a mendicant
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life.

> For others, sickness is natural,\
> and so are old age and death.\
> Though this is how their nature is,\
> ordinary people feel disgusted.
>
> If I were to be disgusted\
> with creatures whose nature is such,\
> it would not be appropriate for me,\
> since my life is just the same.
>
> Living in such a way,\
> I understood the truth without attachments.\
> I mastered all vanities---\
> of health, of youth,
>
> and even of life---\
> seeing renunciation as sanctuary.\
> Zeal sprang up in me\
> as I looked to extinguishment.
>
> Now I'm unable\
> to indulge in sensual pleasures;\
> there's no turning back,\
> I'm committed to the spiritual life."

### N 3.40 In Charge  *Ādhipateyyasutta* {#n-3.40-in-charge-ādhipateyyasutta .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these three things to put in charge. What three?
Putting oneself, the world, or the teaching in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting oneself in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death;
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." But it would not be appropriate
for me to seek sensual pleasures like those I abandoned when I went
forth, or even worse.' Then they reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up
and unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body
shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in
[samādhi]{lang="sa"}.' Putting themselves in charge, they give up the
unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and
develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is called
putting oneself in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting the world in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death,
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." And now, since I've now gone
forth, I might have sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. But the
population of the world is large, and there are ascetics and brahmins
who have psychic power---they're clairvoyant, and can read the minds of
others. They see far without being seen, even by those close; and they
understand the minds of others. They would know me:

"Look at this gentleman; he's gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness, but he's living mixed up with bad, unskillful
qualities." And there are deities, too, who have psychic power---they're
clairvoyant, and can read the minds of others. They see far without
being seen, even by those close; and they understand the minds of
others. They would know me:

"Look at this gentleman; he's gone forth out of faith from the lay life
to homelessness, but he's living mixed up with bad, unskillful
qualities."' Then they reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up and
unflagging, mindfulness shall be established and lucid, my body shall be
tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind shall be immersed in
[samādhi]{lang="sa"}.' Putting the world in charge, they give up the
unskillful and develop the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and
develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is called
putting the world in charge.

And what, mendicants, is putting the teaching in charge? It's when a
mendicant has gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, and reflects like this: 'I didn't go forth from the lay life
to homelessness for the sake of a robe, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth
in this or that state. But I was swamped by rebirth, old age, and death,
by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. I was swamped by
suffering, mired in suffering. And I thought, "Hopefully I can find an
end to this entire mass of suffering." The teaching is well explained by
the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves. I have spiritual companions who live knowing and seeing. Now
that I've gone forth in this well explained teaching and training, it
would not be appropriate for me to live lazy and heedless.' Then they
reflect: 'My energy shall be roused up and unflagging, mindfulness shall
be established and lucid, my body shall be tranquil and undisturbed, and
my mind shall be immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}.' Putting the teaching
in charge, they give up the unskillful and develop the skillful, they
give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep
themselves pure. This is called putting the teaching in charge.

These are the three things to put in charge.

> There's no privacy in the world,\
> for someone who does bad deeds.\
> You'll know for yourself,\
> whether you've lied or told the truth.
>
> When you witness your good self,\
> you despise it;\
> while you disguise\
> your bad self inside yourself.
>
> The gods and the Realized One see\
> the fool who lives unjustly in the world.\
> So with yourself in charge, live mindfully;\
> with the world in charge,\
> \>be alert and practice absorption;\
> with the teaching in charge,\
> \>live in line with that teaching:\
> a sage who tries for the truth doesn't deteriorate.
>
> [Māra]{lang="sa"}'s conquered; the terminator's overcome:\
> one who strives reaches the end of rebirth.\
> Unaffected, intelligent, knowing the world---\
> that sage is determined by nothing at all."

## A Short Chapter  {#a-short-chapter .unnumbered}

### N 3.41 Present  *Sammukhībhāvasutta* {#n-3.41-present-sammukhībhāvasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when three things are present, a faithful gentleman creates
much merit. What three? When faith is present, when a gift to give is
present, and when those worthy of a religious donation are present. When
these three things are present, a faithful gentleman creates much
merit."

### N 3.42 Three Grounds  *Tiṭhānasutta* {#n-3.42-three-grounds-tiṭhānasutta .unnumbered}

"There are three grounds, mendicants, by which a person with faith and
confidence can be known. What three? They like to see ethical people.
They like to hear the true teaching. And they live at home rid of the
stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go,
committed to charity, loving to give and to share. These are the three
grounds by which a person with faith and confidence can be known.

> They like to see ethical people;\
> they want to hear the true teaching;\
> they've driven out the stain of stinginess:\
> that's who's called a person of faith."

### N 3.43 Good Reasons  *Atthavasasutta* {#n-3.43-good-reasons-atthavasasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, taking three reasons into consideration provides quite
enough motivation to teach Dhamma to another. What three? When the
teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. When the audience
understands the meaning and the teaching. When both the teacher and the
audience understand the meaning and the teaching.

Taking these three reasons into consideration provides quite enough
motivation to teach Dhamma to another."

### N 3.44 When Conversation Flows  *Kathāpavattisutta* {#n-3.44-when-conversation-flows-kathāpavattisutta .unnumbered}

"In three situations, mendicants, conversation flows. What three? When
the teacher understands the meaning and the teaching. When the audience
understands the meaning and the teaching. When both the teacher and the
audience understand the meaning and the teaching. These are the three
situations in which conversation flows."

### N 3.45 Recommended by the Astute  *Paṇḍitasutta* {#n-3.45-recommended-by-the-astute-paṇḍitasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three things are recommended by astute true persons.
What three? Giving, going forth, and taking care of your mother and
father. These are the three things recommended by astute true persons.

> The virtuous recommend giving,\
> harmlessness, restraint, and self-control;\
> caring for mother and father,\
> and peaceful spiritual practitioners.
>
> These are the things recommended by the good,\
> which the astute should cultivate.\
> A noble one, having vision,\
> will enjoy a world of grace."

### N 3.46 Ethical  *Sīlavantasutta* {#n-3.46-ethical-sīlavantasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, when ethical renunciates are supported by a town or
village, the people there create much merit in three ways. What three?
By way of body, speech, and mind. When ethical renunciates are supported
by a town or village, the people there create much merit in these three
ways."

### N 3.47 Characteristics of the Conditioned  *Saṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta* {#n-3.47-characteristics-of-the-conditioned-saṅkhatalakkhaṇasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, the conditioned has these three characteristics. What
three? Arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while
persisting is evident. These are the three characteristics of the
conditioned."

#### Characteristics of the Unconditioned  {#characteristics-of-the-unconditioned .unnumbered}

"The unconditioned has these three characteristics. What three? No
arising is evident, no vanishing is evident, and no change while
persisting is evident. These are the three characteristics of the
unconditioned."

### N 3.48 The King of Mountains  *Pabbatarājasutta* {#n-3.48-the-king-of-mountains-pabbatarājasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, great sal trees grow in three ways supported by the
Himalayas, the king of mountains. What three? The branches, leaves, and
foliage; the bark and shoots; and the softwood and heartwood. Great sal
trees grow in these three ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of
mountains.

In the same way, a family grows in three ways supported by a family head
with faith. What three? Faith, ethics, and wisdom. A family grows in
these three ways supported by a family head with faith.

> Supported by the rocky mountain\
> in the wilds, the formidable forest,\
> the tree grows\
> to become lord of the forest.
>
> So too, when the family head\
> is ethical and faithful,\
> supported by them, they grow:\
> children, partners, and kin,\
> colleagues, relatives,\
> and those dependent for their livelihood.
>
> Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous,\
> the generosity and good deeds,\
> those who see clearly\
> do likewise.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> the path that goes to a good place,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

### N 3.49 Keen  *Ātappakaraṇīyasutta* {#n-3.49-keen-ātappakaraṇīyasutta .unnumbered}

"In three situations, mendicants, you should be keen. What three? You
should be keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from arising. You
should be keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And you should be
keen to endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, life-threatening. In these three situations, you should be
keen.

It's a mendicant who is keen to prevent bad, unskillful qualities from
arising. They're keen to give rise to skillful qualities. And they're
keen to endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, life-threatening. This is called a mendicant who is keen,
alert, and mindful so as to rightly make an end of suffering."

### N 3.50 A Master Thief  *Mahācorasutta* {#n-3.50-a-master-thief-mahācorasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a master thief with three factors breaks into houses,
plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway
robbery. What three?

A master thief relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals. And how does a master thief rely on uneven ground? It's
when a master thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged
mountains. That's how a master thief relies on uneven ground.

And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? It's when a master
thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a blind spot, or a large
forest grove. That's how a master thief relies on thick cover.

And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
master thief relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief relies on powerful individuals.

A master thief with these three factors breaks into houses, plunders
wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery.

In the same way, when a bad mendicant has three factors, they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What three?

A bad mendicant relies on uneven ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on uneven ground? It's when a bad
mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's
how a bad mendicant relies on uneven ground.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? It's when a bad
mendicant has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist view. That's how
a bad mendicant relies on thick cover.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
bad mendicant relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals.

When a bad mendicant has these three qualities, they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness."

::: center
*[the second fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Brahmins  {#the-chapter-on-brahmins .unnumbered}

### N 3.51 Two Brahmins (1st)  *Paṭhamadvebrāhmaṇasutta* {#n-3.51-two-brahmins-1st-paṭhamadvebrāhmaṇasutta .unnumbered}

Then two old brahmins---elderly and senior, who were advanced in years
and had reached the final stage of life, a hundred and twenty years
old---went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side,
and said to the Buddha:

"We brahmins, Mister Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we're advanced
in years and have reached the final stage of life; we're a hundred and
twenty years old. And we haven't done what is good and skillful, nor
have we made a shelter from fear. Advise us, Mister Gotama, instruct us!
It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness."

"Indeed, brahmins, you're old, elderly and senior. And you haven't done
what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. This
world is led on by old age, sickness, and death. But restraint here by
way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, protection, island,
refuge, and haven for the departed.

> This life, so very short, is led onward.\
> There's no shelter for someone\
> \>who's been led on by old age.\
> Seeing this peril in death,\
> you should do good deeds that bring happiness.
>
> The restraint practiced here---\
> of body, speech, and mind---\
> leads the departed to happiness,\
> as the good deeds done while living."

### N 3.52 Two Brahmins (2nd)  *Dutiyadvebrāhmaṇasutta* {#n-3.52-two-brahmins-2nd-dutiyadvebrāhmaṇasutta .unnumbered}

Then two old brahmins---elderly and senior, who were advanced in years
and had reached the final stage of life, being a hundred and twenty
years old---went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to the Buddha:

"We brahmins, Mister Gotama, are old, elderly and senior, we're advanced
in years and have reached the final stage of life; we're a hundred and
twenty years old. And we haven't done what is good and skillful, nor
have we made a shelter from fear. Advise us, Mister Gotama, instruct us!
It will be for our lasting welfare and happiness."

"Indeed, brahmins, you're old, elderly and senior. And you haven't done
what is good and skillful, nor have you made a shelter from fear. This
world is burning with old age, sickness, and death. But restraint here
by way of body, speech, and mind is the shelter, protection, island,
refuge, and haven for the departed.

> When your house is on fire,\
> you rescue the pot\
> that's useful,\
> not the one that's burnt.
>
> And as the world is on fire\
> with old age and death,\
> you should rescue by giving,\
> for what's given is rescued.
>
> The restraint practiced here---\
> of body, speech, and mind---\
> leads the departed to happiness,\
> as the good deeds done while living."

### N 3.53 A Certain Brahmin  *Aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta* {#n-3.53-a-certain-brahmin-aññatarabrāhmaṇasutta .unnumbered}

Then a brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings with him.
Seated to one side he said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome and overwhelmed by greed, intends to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and
sadness. When greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental
pain and sadness. This is how the teaching is apparent in the present
life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that
sensible people can know it for themselves.

A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
hate has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.54 A Wanderer  *Paribbājakasutta* {#n-3.54-a-wanderer-paribbājakasutta .unnumbered}

Then a brahmin wanderer went up to the Buddha ... Seated to one side he
said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.

A greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
greed has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind.

A greedy person doesn't truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. When greed has been given up, they
truly understand what's for their own good, the good of another, or the
good of both. This is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A hateful person ... A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to
hurt themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain
and sadness. When delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt
themselves, hurt others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental
pain and sadness.

A deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
delusion has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind.

A deluded person doesn't truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. When delusion has been given up,
they truly understand what's for their own good, the good of another, or
the good of both. This, too, is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

### N 3.55 Quenched  *Nibbutasutta* {#n-3.55-quenched-nibbutasutta .unnumbered}

Then the brahmin [Jānussoṇi]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they say that 'extinguishment is apparent in the present
life'. In what way is extinguishment apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life.

A hateful person ...

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness.
This, too, is how extinguishment is apparent in the present life.

When you experience the ending of greed, hate, and delusion without
anything left over, that's how extinguishment is apparent in the present
life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that
sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

### N 3.56 Falling Apart  *Palokasutta* {#n-3.56-falling-apart-palokasutta .unnumbered}

Then a well-to-do Brahmin went up to the Buddha, and seated to one side
he said to him:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that brahmins of the past who were elderly
and senior, the tutors of tutors, said: 'In the old days this world was
so full of people you'd think they were squashed together. The villages,
towns and capital cities were no more than a chicken's flight apart.'
What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why these days human numbers
have dwindled, a decline in population is evident, and whole villages,
towns, cities, and countries have disappeared?"

"These days, brahmin, humans just love illicit desire. They're overcome
by immoral greed, and mired in wrong custom. Taking up sharp knives,
they murder each other. And so many people perish. This is the cause,
this is the reason why these days human numbers have dwindled.

Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire ... the
heavens don't provide enough rain, so there's famine, a bad harvest,
with blighted crops that turn to straw. And so many people perish. This
is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have
dwindled.

Furthermore, because these days humans just love illicit desire ...
native spirits let vicious monsters loose. And so many people perish.
This is the cause, this is the reason why these days human numbers have
dwindled."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

### N 3.57 With Vacchagotta  *Vacchagottasutta* {#n-3.57-with-vacchagotta-vacchagottasutta .unnumbered}

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"I have heard, Mister Gotama, that the ascetic Gotama says this: 'Gifts
should only be given to me, not to others. Gifts should only be given to
my disciples, not to the disciples of others. Only what is given to me
is very fruitful, not what is given to others. Only what is given to my
disciples is very fruitful, not what is given to the disciples of
others.'

I trust that those who say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and do
not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation in line with
the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and
criticism? For we don't want to misrepresent Mister Gotama."

"Vaccha, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false and untrue.

Anyone who prevents another from giving makes an obstacle and a
roadblock for three people. What three? The giver is obstructed from
making merit. The receiver is obstructed from getting what is offered.
And they've already broken and damaged themselves. Anyone who prevents
another from giving makes an obstacle and a roadblock for these three
people.

Vaccha, this is what I say: 'You even make merit by tipping out
dish-washing water in a cesspool or a sump with living creatures in it,
thinking, "May any creatures here be nourished!"' How much more then for
human beings!

However, I also say that a gift to an ethical person is more fruitful
than one to an unethical person. They've given up five factors, and
possess five factors.

What are the five factors they've given up? Sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are
the five factors they've given up.

What are the five factors they possess? The entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of
freedom. These are the five factors they possess.

I say that a gift to anyone who has given up these five factors and
possesses these five factors is very fruitful.

> Cows may be black or white,\
> red or tawny,\
> mottled or uniform,\
> or pigeon-colored.
>
> But when one is born among them,\
> the bull that's tamed---\
> a behemoth, powerful,\
> well-paced in pulling forward---\
> they yoke the load just to him,\
> regardless of his color.
>
> So it is for humans,\
> wherever they may be born---\
> among aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,\
> menials, or corpse-workers and scavengers---
>
> one is born among them,\
> tamed, true to their vows.\
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious,
>
> they've given up birth and death.\
> Complete in the spiritual journey,\
> with burden put down, detached,\
> they've completed the task\
> \>and are free of defilements.
>
> Gone beyond all things,\
> they're quenched by not grasping.\
> In that flawless field,\
> a religious donation is abundant.
>
> Fools who don't understand---\
> unlearned simpletons---\
> give their gifts to those outside,\
> and don't attend the peaceful ones.
>
> But those who do attend the peaceful ones---\
> wise, esteemed as attentive---\
> and whose faith in the Holy One\
> has roots planted deep,
>
> they go to the realm of the gods,\
> or are born here in a good family.\
> Gradually those astute ones\
> reach extinguishment."

### N 3.58 With Tikaṇṇa  *Tikaṇṇasutta* {#n-3.58-with-tikaṇṇa-tikaṇṇasutta .unnumbered}

Then [Tikaṇṇa]{lang="sa"} the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side, in front of the
Buddha, [Tikaṇṇa]{lang="sa"} praised the brahmins who were proficient in
the three Vedas, "Such are the brahmins, masters of the three Vedic
knowledges! Thus are the brahmins, masters of the three Vedic
knowledges!"

"But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of
the three Vedic knowledges?"

"Mister Gotama, it's when a brahmin is well born on both his mother's
and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and
remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with
their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great man. That's how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is master of
the three Vedic knowledges."

"Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is
quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," [Tikaṇṇa]{lang="sa"} replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the
giving up of pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection
of past lives. They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
This is the first knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is destroyed and
knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as
happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of
the death and rebirth of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they
chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right
view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. This
is the second knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is destroyed and
knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has arisen, as
happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is the third knowledge that they attain. Ignorance
is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed, and light
has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and
resolute.

> For someone whose ethical conduct doesn't waver,\
> who is alert, practicing absorption;\
> whose mind is mastered,\
> unified, serene.
>
> That attentive one dispels the darkness,\
> master of the three knowledges, conqueror of death.\
> For the welfare of gods and humans,\
> he has given up everything, they say.
>
> Accomplished in the three knowledges,\
> living without confusion,\
> bearing the final body,\
> they revere the awakened Gotama.
>
> One who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the ending of rebirth,\
> a sage of perfect insight---
>
> it's because of these three knowledges\
> that a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges.\
> That's who I call a three-knowledge master,\
> and not the other\
> \>who repeats what they are told.

This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins
is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training
of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges
according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of
the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.59 With Jānussoṇi  *Jāṇussoṇisutta* {#n-3.59-with-jānussoṇi-jāṇussoṇisutta .unnumbered}

Then the brahmin [Jānussoṇi]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. Seated to one side he said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, whoever has a sacrifice, an offering of food for
ancestors, a dish of milk-rice prepared for an auspicious ceremony, or a
gift to give, should give it to the brahmins who have mastered the three
Vedic knowledges."

"But brahmin, how do the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient
in the three Vedic knowledges?"

"Mister Gotama, it's when a brahmin is well born on both his mother's
and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation. He recites and
remembers the hymns, and has mastered the three Vedas, together with
their vocabularies and ritual performance, their phonology and word
classification, and the testaments as fifth. He knows them word-by-word,
and their grammar. He is well versed in cosmology and the marks of a
great man. That's how the brahmins describe a brahmin who is proficient
in the three Vedic knowledges."

"Brahmin, a master of three knowledges according to the brahmins is
quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"But Mister Gotama, how is one a master of the three knowledges in the
training of the Noble One? Mister Gotama, please teach me this."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," [Jānussoṇi]{lang="sa"} replied. The Buddha said this:

"Brahmin, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures
... enters and remains in the fourth absorption.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward recollection
of past lives. They recollect many kinds of past lives, with features
and details. This is the first knowledge that they attain. Ignorance is
destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed and light has
arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of
the death and rebirth of sentient beings. With clairvoyance that is
purified and surpasses the human, they understand how sentient beings
are reborn according to their deeds. This is the second knowledge that
they attain. Ignorance is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness
is destroyed and light has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is
diligent, keen, and resolute.

When their mind has become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they extend it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. They truly understand: 'This is suffering'
... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the defilements
of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is the third knowledge that they attain. Ignorance
is destroyed and knowledge has arisen; darkness is destroyed, and light
has arisen, as happens for a meditator who is diligent, keen, and
resolute.

> One who is perfect in precepts and observances,\
> resolute and serene,\
> whose mind is mastered,\
> unified, serene;
>
> who knows their past lives,\
> sees heaven and places of loss,\
> and has attained the end of rebirth,\
> such a sage has perfect insight.
>
> Because of these three knowledges\
> a brahmin is a master of the three knowledges.\
> That's who I call a three-knowledge master,\
> and not the other\
> \>who repeats what they are told.

This, brahmin, is a master of the three knowledges in the training of
the Noble One."

"Mister Gotama, the master of three knowledges according to the brahmins
is quite different from a master of the three knowledges in the training
of the Noble One. And, Mister Gotama, a master of three knowledges
according to the brahmins is not worth a sixteenth part of a master of
the three knowledges in the training of the Noble One.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.60 With Saṅgārava  *Saṅgāravasutta* {#n-3.60-with-saṅgārava-saṅgāravasutta .unnumbered}

Then [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"} the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, we who are called brahmins make sacrifices and encourage
others to make sacrifices. Now, Mister Gotama, both of these
people---the one who sacrifices and the one who encourages others to
sacrifice---are doing good for many people on account of that sacrifice.
But, Mister Gotama, when someone has gone forth from the lay life to
homelessness, they tame, calm, and extinguish themselves alone. That
being so, they are doing good for just one person on account of that
going forth."

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? A Realized One arises in
the world, perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge
and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish
to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He says, 'Come,
this is the path, this is the practice. Practicing like this, I realized
the supreme culmination of the spiritual life with my own insight, and I
make it known. Please, all of you, practice like this, and you too will
realize the supreme culmination of the spiritual life, and will live
having realized it with your own insight.' So the teacher teaches
Dhamma, and others practice accordingly, in their hundreds and
thousands, and hundreds of thousands.

What do you think, brahmin? This being so, are they doing good for just
one person or for many people on account of going forth?"

"This being so, Mister Gotama, they are doing good for many people on
account of going forth."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"},
"Brahmin, which of these two practices do you believe has fewer
requirements and undertakings, yet is more fruitful and beneficial?"

[Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"} said to Ānanda, "Those such as misters Gotama and
Ānanda are honored and praised by me!"

For a second time, Ānanda said to [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"}, "Brahmin, I
didn't ask you who you honor and praise. I asked you which of these two
practices do you believe has fewer requirements and undertakings, yet is
more fruitful and beneficial?"

For a second time [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"} said to Ānanda, "Those such as
misters Gotama and Ānanda are honored and praised by me!"

For a third time, Ānanda said to [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"}, "Brahmin, I
didn't ask you who you honor and praise. I asked you which of these two
practices do you believe has fewer requirements and undertakings, yet is
more fruitful and beneficial?"

For a third time [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"} said to Ānanda, "Those such as
misters Gotama and Ānanda are honored and praised by me!"

Then it occurred to the Buddha, "Though Ānanda asked him a sensible
question three times, [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"} falters without answering.
Why don't I give him a way out?"

So the Buddha said to [Saṅgārava]{lang="sa"}, "Brahmin, what came up in
the conversation among the king's retinue today, sitting together in the
royal compound?"

"Mister Gotama, this came up: 'Formerly, it seems, there were fewer
mendicants, but more of them displayed superhuman demonstrations of
psychic power; while these days, there are more mendicants, but fewer
display superhuman demonstrations of psychic power.' This is what came
up in the conversation among the king's retinue today, while sitting
together in the royal compound."

"Brahmin, there are three kinds of demonstration. What three? A
demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of revealing, and a
demonstration of instruction.

And what is the demonstration of psychic power? It's when someone wields
the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one
again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a
rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the
earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying
cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the
hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as
far as the realm of divinity. This is called the demonstration of
psychic power.

And what is the demonstration of revealing? In one case, someone reveals
by means of a sign: 'This is what you're thinking, such is your thought,
and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this many
times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise.

In another case, someone reveals after hearing it from humans or
non-humans or deities: 'This is what you're thinking, such is your
thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And even if they reveal this
many times, it turns out exactly so, not otherwise.

In another case, someone reveals by hearing the sound of thought
spreading as someone thinks and considers: 'This is what you're
thinking, such is your thought, and thus is your state of mind.' And
even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly so, not
otherwise.

In another case, someone comprehends the mind of a person who has
attained the immersion that's free of placing the mind and keeping it
connected. They understand: 'Judging by the way this person's intentions
are directed, immediately after this mind state, they'll think this
thought.' And even if they reveal this many times, it turns out exactly
so, not otherwise. This is called the demonstration of revealing.

And what is a demonstration of instruction? It's when someone instructs
others like this: 'Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like
this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.' This
is called a demonstration of instruction.

These are the three kinds of demonstration. Of these three kinds of
demonstration, which do you consider to be the finest?"

"Regarding this, Mister Gotama, a demonstration of psychic power is
experienced only by the one who performs it, occurring only to them.
This seems to me like a magic trick.

And the demonstration where someone reveals something by means of a
sign, or after hearing it from humans, non-humans, or deities, or by
hearing the sound of thought spreading as someone thinks and considers,
or by comprehending the mind of another person, is also experienced only
by the one who performs it, occurring only to them. This also seems to
me like a magic trick.

But as to the demonstration where someone instructs others: 'Think like
this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up
this, and live having achieved that.' I prefer this demonstration,
Mister Gotama. It's the finest of the three kinds of demonstration.

It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how well this was said by
Mister Gotama. We regard Mister Gotama as someone who possesses these
three kinds of demonstration. For Mister Gotama wields the many kinds of
psychic power ... controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.
And Mister Gotama comprehends the mind of another person who has
attained the immersion that is free of placing the mind and keeping it
connected. He understands: 'Judging by the way this person's intentions
are directed, immediately after this mind state they'll think this
thought.' And Mister Gotama instructs others like this: 'Think like
this, not like that. Focus your mind like this, not like that. Give up
this, and live having achieved that.'"

"Your words are clearly invasive and intrusive, brahmin. Nevertheless, I
will answer you. For I do wield the many kinds of psychic power ...
controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity. And I do
comprehend the mind of another person who has attained the immersion
that is free of placing the mind and keeping it connected. I understand:
'Judging by the way this person's intentions are directed, immediately
after this mind state they'll think this thought.' And I do instruct
others like this: 'Think like this, not like that. Focus your mind like
this, not like that. Give up this, and live having achieved that.'"

"But Mister Gotama, is there even one other mendicant who possesses
these three kinds of demonstration, apart from Mister Gotama?"

"There's not just one hundred mendicants, brahmin, who possess these
three kinds of demonstration, nor two, three, four, or five hundred, but
many more than that."

"But where are these mendicants now staying?"

"Right here, brahmin, in this [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. I
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

## The Great Chapter  {#the-great-chapter .unnumbered}

### N 3.61 Sectarian Tenets  *Titthāyatanasutta* {#n-3.61-sectarian-tenets-titthāyatanasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and
grilled by the astute---when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction. What three?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of past deeds.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---is because of God Almighty's creation.'

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everything this individual experiences---pleasurable, painful, or
neutral---has no cause or reason.'

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of past deeds, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all because
of past deeds.'

Those who believe that past deeds are the most important thing have no
enthusiasm or effort, no idea that there are things that should and
should not be done. Since they don't actually find that there are things
that should and should not be done, they're unmindful and careless, and
can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my first legitimate refutation
of the ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced is because of God Almighty's
creation, and I said to them: 'Is it really true that this is the
venerables' view?' And they answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that
case, you might kill living creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious,
or have wrong view, all because of God Almighty's creation.'

Those who believe that God Almighty's creative power is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
second legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

Regarding this, I went up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is
that everything that is experienced has no cause or reason, and I said
to them: 'Is it really true that this is the venerables' view?' And they
answered, 'Yes'. I said to them: 'In that case, you might kill living
creatures, steal, be unchaste; use speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; be covetous, malicious, or have wrong view, all without
cause or reason.'

Those who believe that the absence of cause or reason is the most
important thing have no enthusiasm, no effort, no idea that there are
things that should and should not be done. Since they don't actually
find that there are things that should and should not be done, they're
unmindful and careless, and can't rightly be called ascetics. This is my
third legitimate refutation of the ascetics and brahmins who have this
doctrine and view.

These are the three sectarian tenets---as pursued, pressed, and grilled
by the astute---which, when taken to their conclusion, end with
inaction.

But the Dhamma that I've taught is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond
reproach, and not scorned by sensible ascetics and brahmins. What is the
Dhamma that I've taught?

'These are the six elements': this is the Dhamma I've taught ...

'These are the six fields of contact': this is the Dhamma I've taught
...

'These are the eighteen mental preoccupations': this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...

'These are the four noble truths': this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six elements: the elements of earth, water, fire, air,
space, and consciousness.

'"These are the six elements": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, but why did I say it?

There are these six fields of contact: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and
mind contact.

'"These are the six fields of contact": this is the Dhamma I've taught
...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' This is what I said, but why did I say it?

Seeing a sight with the eye, one is preoccupied with a sight that's a
basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

Hearing a sound with the ear ...

Smelling an odor with the nose ...

Tasting a flavor with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ...

Becoming conscious of an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an
idea that's a basis for happiness or sadness or equanimity.

'"These are the eighteen mental preoccupations": this is the Dhamma I've
taught ...' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught ...'
That's what I said, but why did I say it?

Supported by the six elements, an embryo is conceived. When it is
conceived, there are name and form. Name and form are conditions for the
six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions for contact.
Contact is a condition for feeling. It's for one who feels that I
declare: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ...
'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'.

And what is the noble truth of suffering? Rebirth is suffering; old age
is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress are suffering; association with the disliked is suffering;
separation from the liked is suffering; not getting what you wish for is
suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering. This is
called the noble truth of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering? Ignorance is a
condition for choices. Choices are a condition for consciousness.
Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name and form are
conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields are conditions
for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition
for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a
condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this
entire mass of suffering originates. This is called the noble truth of
the origin of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering? When
ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease.
When choices cease, consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases,
name and form cease. When name and form cease, the six sense fields
cease. When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases. When contact
ceases, feeling ceases. When feeling ceases, craving ceases. When
craving ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.
This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the noble
truth of the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.

'"These are the four noble truths": this is the Dhamma I've taught that
is irrefutable, uncorrupted, beyond reproach, and is not scorned by
sensible ascetics and brahmins.' That's what I said, and this is why I
said it."

### N 3.62 Perils  *Bhayasutta* {#n-3.62-perils-bhayasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and
a child can't find their mother. This is the first peril that tears
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find
their mother. This is the second peril that tears mothers and children
apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, a mother can't find her child, and a child can't find their
mother. This is the third peril that tears mothers and children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
tear mothers and children apart.

Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of three perils that
don't tear mothers and children apart. What three?

There comes a time when a great fire flares up, and it burns villages,
towns, and cities. When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her
child, and a child can find their mother. This is the first peril that
doesn't tear mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time when a great storm gathers, and it
unleashes a mighty flood that sweeps away villages, towns, and cities.
When this happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child
can find their mother. This is the second peril that doesn't tear
mothers and children apart.

Furthermore, there comes a time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so
the countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. When this
happens, sometimes a mother can find her child, and a child can find
their mother. This is the third peril that doesn't tear mothers and
children apart.

These are the three perils an unlearned ordinary person speaks of that
don't tear mothers and children apart.

There are three perils that tear mothers and children apart. What three?

The perils of old age, sickness, and death. When a child is growing old,
a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me grow old, may my child not grow
old!' When a mother is growing old, a child doesn't get their wish: 'Let
me grow old, may my mother not grow old!'

When a child is sick, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me be sick,
may my child not be sick!' When a mother is sick, a child doesn't get
their wish: 'Let me be sick, may my mother not be sick!'

When a child is dying, a mother doesn't get her wish: 'Let me die, may
my child not die!' When a mother is dying, a child doesn't get their
wish: 'Let me die, may my mother not die!' These are the three perils
that tear mothers and children apart.

There is a path and a practice that leads to giving up and going beyond
the three perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the
three perils that do tear mothers and children apart. What is that path
and practice? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this
is the practice that leads to giving up and going beyond the three
perils that don't tear mothers and children apart, and the three perils
that do tear mothers and children apart."

### N 3.63 At Venāgapura  *Venāgapurasutta* {#n-3.63-at-venāgapura-venāgapurasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants when he arrived
at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named [Venāgapura]{lang="sa"}. The
brahmins and householders of [Venāgapura]{lang="sa"} heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at [Venāgapura]{lang="sa"}. He has this good
reputation: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha,
accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world,
supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans,
awakened, blessed.' He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. It's good to see such perfected ones."

Then the brahmins and householders of [Venāgapura]{lang="sa"} went up to
the Buddha. Before sitting down to one side, some bowed, some exchanged
greetings and polite conversation, some held up their joined palms
toward the Buddha, some announced their name and clan, while some kept
silent. Then the brahmin Vacchagotta of [Venāgapura]{lang="sa"} said to
the Buddha:

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing, how your faculties are so
very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright. It's
like a golden brown jujube in the autumn, or a palm fruit freshly
plucked from the stalk, or a pendant of Black Plum River gold, fashioned
by a deft smith, well-wrought in the forge, and placed on a cream rug
where it shines and glows and radiates. In the same way, your faculties
are so very clear, and the complexion of your skin is pure and bright.

Surely Mister Gotama gets when he wants, without trouble or difficulty,
various kinds of high and luxurious bedding, such as: sofas, couches,
woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white, embroidered with flowers,
quilted, embroidered with animals, double-or single-fringed---and silk
covers studded with gems, as well as silken sheets, woven carpets, rugs
for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope hide rugs, and spreads of
fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red cushions at both ends."

"Brahmin, these various kinds of high and luxurious bedding are hard for
renunciates to find. And even if they do get them, they're not allowed.

There are, brahmin, these three high and luxurious beds that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty. What three? The
heavenly high and luxurious bed, the divine high and luxurious bed, and
the noble high and luxurious bed. These are the three high and luxurious
beds that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the heavenly high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, I enter and remain in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, I enter and remain in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And
with the fading away of rapture, I enter and remain in the third
absorption, where I meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware,
personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare,
'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' With the giving up of
pleasure and pain, and the ending of former happiness and sadness, I
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. When I'm practicing like this, if
I walk, at that time my walking is heavenly. When I'm practicing like
this, if I stand, at that time my standing is heavenly. When I'm
practicing like this, if I sit, at that time my sitting is heavenly.
When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my lying is
heavenly. This is the heavenly high and luxurious bed that I get these
days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a heavenly high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

But what, Mister Gotama, is the divine high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
my presence. I meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction,
and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity
and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a
heart full of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I meditate spreading a heart
full of rejoicing to one direction, and to the second, and to the third,
and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, I spread a heart full of rejoicing to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. I
meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to
the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, I spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. When I'm practicing like this, if I walk, at that
time my walking is divine. ... my standing is divine. ... my sitting is
divine. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down, at that time my
lying is divine. This is the divine high and luxurious bed that I get
these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a divine high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

"But what, Mister Gotama, is the noble high and luxurious bed?"

"Brahmin, when I am living supported by a village or town, I robe up in
the morning and, taking my bowl and robe, enter the town or village for
alms. After the meal, on my return from almsround, I enter within a
forest. I gather up some grass or leaves into a pile and sit down
cross-legged, setting my body straight, and establishing mindfulness in
his presence. I know this: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut
them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so
they're unable to arise in the future.' When I'm practicing like this,
if I walk, at that time my walking is noble. ... my standing is noble.
... my sitting is noble. When I'm practicing like this, if I lie down,
at that time my lying is noble. This is the noble high and luxurious bed
that I get these days when I want, without trouble or difficulty."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Who but Mister Gotama
could get such a noble high and luxurious bed when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty?

Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, Mister Gotama has made the teaching clear in many ways. We
go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Mister Gotama remember us
as lay followers who have gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.64 With Sarabha  *Sarabhasutta* {#n-3.64-with-sarabha-sarabhasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time a wanderer called Sarabha had recently left this
teaching and training. He was telling a crowd in [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"},
"I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I
left their teaching and training."

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} for alms. They heard what
Sarabha was saying.

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "The wanderer
called Sarabha has recently left this teaching and training. He was
telling a crowd in [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}: 'I learned the teaching of the
ascetics who follow the Sakyan, then I left their teaching and
training.' Sir, please go to the wanderers' monastery on the banks of
the [Sappinī]{lang="sa"} river to see Sarabha the wanderer out of
sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the wanderers' monastery on the banks of the [Sappinī]{lang="sa"} river
to visit Sarabha the wanderer. He sat on the seat spread out, and said
to the wanderer Sarabha, "Is it really true, Sarabha, that you've been
saying: 'I learned the teaching of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan,
then I left their teaching and training.'" When he said this, Sarabha
kept silent.

For a second time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Tell me, Sarabha, what
exactly have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the
Sakyan? If you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you
have learned it fully, I'll agree." For a second time, Sarabha kept
silent.

For a third time, the Buddha said to Sarabha, "Sarabha, the teachings of
the ascetics who follow the Sakyan are clear to me. What exactly have
you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan? If
you've not learned it fully, I'll fill you in. But if you have learned
it fully, I'll agree." For a third time, Sarabha kept silent.

Then those wanderers said to Sarabha, "The ascetic Gotama has offered to
tell you anything you ask for. Speak, reverend Sarabha, what exactly
have you learned of the teachings of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan?
If you've not learned it fully, he'll fill you in. But if you have
learned it fully, he'll agree." When this was said, Sarabha sat silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to the wanderers:

"Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to be a fully awakened
Buddha, but you don't understand these things.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'You claim to have ended all
defilements, but you still have these defilements.' Then I'd carefully
pursue, press, and grill them on that point. When grilled by me, they
would, without a doubt, fall into one of these three categories. They'd
dodge the issue, distracting the discussion with irrelevant points.
They'd display annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Or they'd sit silent,
dismayed, shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say,
like Sarabha.

Wanderers, someone might say to me: 'Your teaching does not lead someone
who practices it to the complete ending of suffering, the goal for which
it is taught.' Then I'd carefully pursue, press, and grill them on that
point. When grilled by me, they would, without a doubt, fall into one of
these three categories. They'd dodge the issue, distracting the
discussion with irrelevant points. They'd display annoyance, hate, and
bitterness. Or they'd sit silent, dismayed, shoulders drooping,
downcast, depressed, with nothing to say, like Sarabha."

Then the Buddha, having roared his lion's roar three times in the
wanderers' monastery on the bank of the [Sappinī]{lang="sa"} river, rose
into the air and flew away.

Soon after the Buddha left, those wanderers beset Sarabha on all sides
with sneering and jeering. "Reverend Sarabha, you're just like an old
jackal in the formidable wilderness who thinks, 'I'll roar a lion's
roar!' but they still only manage to squeal and yelp like a jackal. In
the same way, when the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll roar a
lion's roar!' but you only managed to squeal and yelp like a jackal.

You're just like a marsh hen who thinks, 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!' but
they still only manage to cry like a marsh hen. In the same way, when
the ascetic Gotama wasn't here you said 'I'll cry like a cuckoo!' but
you still only managed to cry like a marsh hen.

You're just like a bull that thinks to bellow only when the cowstall is
empty. In the same way, you only thought to bellow when the ascetic
Gotama wasn't here." That's how those wanderers beset Sarabha on all
sides with sneering and jeering.

### N 3.65 With the Kālāmas of Kesamutta  *Kesamuttisutta* {#n-3.65-with-the-kālāmas-of-kesamutta-kesamuttisutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of
mendicants when he arrived at a town of the [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"} named
Kesamutta. The [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"} of Kesamutta heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Kesamutta. He has this good reputation: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha ...' It's good to see
such perfected ones."

Then the [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha. Before sitting down
to one side, some bowed, some exchanged greetings and polite
conversation, some held up their joined palms toward the Buddha, some
announced their name and clan, while some kept silent. Seated to one
side the [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"} said to the Buddha:

"There are, sir, some ascetics and brahmins who come to Kesamutta. They
explain and promote only their own doctrine, while they attack,
badmouth, disparage, and smear the doctrines of others. Then some other
ascetics and brahmins come to Kesamutta. They too explain and promote
only their own doctrine, while they attack, badmouth, disparage, and
smear the doctrines of others. So, sir, we're doubting and uncertain: 'I
wonder who of these respected ascetics and brahmins speaks the truth,
and who speaks falsehood?'"

"It is enough, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, for you to be doubting and
uncertain. Doubt has come up in you about an uncertain matter.

Please, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by sensible people, and when you
undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering', then you should give
them up.

What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}? Does greed come up in a person
for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A greedy individual, overcome by greed, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}? Does hate come up in a person
for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A hateful individual, overcome by hate, kills living creatures, steals,
commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is that
for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}? Does delusion come up in a
person for their welfare or harm?"

"Harm, sir."

"A deluded individual, overcome by delusion, kills living creatures,
steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others to do the same. Is
that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, don't go by oral transmission, don't go by
lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical authority, don't
rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by reasoned train of
thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after deliberation, don't
go by the appearance of competence, and don't think 'The ascetic is our
respected teacher.' But when you know for yourselves: 'These things are
skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and when you undertake
them, they lead to welfare and happiness', then you should acquire them
and keep them.

What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}? Does contentment come up in a
person for their welfare or harm?"

"Welfare, sir."

"An individual who is content, not overcome by greed, doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage others to do
the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}? Does love come up in a person
for their welfare or harm? ... Does understanding come up in a person
for their welfare or harm? ... Is that for their lasting welfare and
happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, [Kālāmas]{lang="sa"}, when I said: 'Please, don't go by oral
transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by
canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't
go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view
after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't
think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know for
yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of compassion to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of rejoicing to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

They meditate spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free
of enmity and ill will.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
uncorrupted and purified, they've won four consolations in this very
life. 'If it turns out there is another world, and good and bad deeds
have a result, then---when the body breaks up, after death---I'll be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' This is the first consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out there is no other world, and good and bad deeds don't
have a result, then in this very life I'll keep myself free of enmity
and ill will, untroubled and happy.' This is the second consolation
they've won.

'If it turns out that bad things happen to people who do bad things,
then since I have no bad intentions, and since I'm not doing anything
bad, how can suffering touch me?' This is the third consolation they've
won.

'If it turns out that bad things don't happen to people who do bad
things, then I still see myself pure on both sides.' This is the fourth
consolation they've won.

When that noble disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will,
undefiled and purified, they've won these four consolations in this very
life."

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! When that noble
disciple has a mind that's free of enmity and ill will, undefiled and
purified, they've won these four consolations in this very life. ...

Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... We go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth,
may the Buddha remember us as lay followers who have gone for refuge for
life."

### N 3.66 With Sāḷha and His Friend  *Sāḷhasutta* {#n-3.66-with-sāḷha-and-his-friend-sāḷhasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} Now at that time Venerable Nandaka was
staying near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of
[Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then
[Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}, [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s grandson, and
[Rohaṇa]{lang="sa"}, [Pekhuṇiya]{lang="sa"}'s grandson went up to
Venerable Nandaka, bowed, and sat down to one side. Then Venerable
Nandaka said to [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}:

"Please, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} and friend, don't go by oral transmission,
don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical
authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by
reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after
deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think
'The ascetic is our respected teacher.' But when you know for
yourselves: 'These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering', then you should give them up.

What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}? Is greed real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Covetousness' is what I mean by this. A person who is greedy and
covetous kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}? Is hate real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Malice' is what I mean by this. A hateful and malicious person kills
living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and encourages others
to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}? Is delusion real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Ignorance' is what I mean by this. A person who is deluded and
ignorant kills living creatures, steals, commits adultery, lies, and
encourages others to do the same. Is that for their lasting harm and
suffering?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Unskillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameworthy, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Criticized by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to harm and suffering, or not? Or
how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to harm and suffering. That's how we
see it."

"So, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by
oral transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go
by canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference,
don't go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a
view after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and
don't think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know
for yourselves: "These things are unskillful, blameworthy, criticized by
sensible people, and when you undertake them, they lead to harm and
suffering", then you should give them up.' That's what I said, and this
is why I said it.

Please, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} and friend, don't go by oral transmission,
don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go by canonical
authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference, don't go by
reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a view after
deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and don't think
'The ascetic is our respected teacher.' But when you know for
yourselves: 'These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible
people, and when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and
happiness', then you should acquire them and keep them.

What do you think? Is contentment real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Satisfaction' is what I mean by this. A person who is content and
satisfied doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or
encourage others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and
happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

What do you think? Is love real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Kindness' is what I mean by this. A loving and kind-hearted person
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}? Is understanding real?"

"Yes, sir."

"'Knowledge' is what I mean by this. A person who understands and knows
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit adultery, lie, or encourage
others to do the same. Is that for their lasting welfare and happiness?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"}, are these things skillful or
unskillful?"

"Skillful, sir."

"Blameworthy or blameless?"

"Blameless, sir."

"Criticized or praised by sensible people?"

"Praised by sensible people, sir."

"When you undertake them, do they lead to welfare and happiness, or not?
Or how do you see this?"

"When you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness. That's how
we see it."

"So, [Sāḷha]{lang="sa"} and friend, when I said: 'Please, don't go by
oral transmission, don't go by lineage, don't go by testament, don't go
by canonical authority, don't rely on logic, don't rely on inference,
don't go by reasoned train of thought, don't go by the acceptance of a
view after deliberation, don't go by the appearance of competence, and
don't think "The ascetic is our respected teacher." But when you know
for yourselves:

"These things are skillful, blameless, praised by sensible people, and
when you undertake them, they lead to welfare and happiness", then you
should acquire them and keep them.' That's what I said, and this is why
I said it.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love ...
compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will.

They understand: 'There is this, there is what is worse than this, there
is what is better than this, and there is an escape beyond the scope of
perception.' Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When
they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

They understand: 'Formerly there was greed, which was unskillful. Now
there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was hate, which was
unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful. Formerly there was
delusion, which was unskillful. Now there is none, so that's skillful.'
So they live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine."

### N 3.67 Topics of Discussion  *Kathāvatthusutta* {#n-3.67-topics-of-discussion-kathāvatthusutta .unnumbered}

"There are, mendicants, these three topics of discussion. What three?
You might discuss the past: 'That is how it was in the past.' You might
discuss the future: 'That is how it will be in the future.' Or you might
discuss the present: 'This is how it is at present.'

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if it needs to be answered categorically and they don't answer
it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer without
analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer without
a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they don't set it
aside, then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a
person is asked a question, if it needs to be answered categorically and
they answer it categorically; or if it needs analysis and they answer
after analyzing it; or if it needs a counter-question and they answer
with a counter-question; or if it should be set aside and they set it
aside, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they're not consistent about what their position is and
what it isn't; about what they propose; about speaking from what they
know; and about the appropriate procedure, then that person is not
competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a question, if
they are consistent about what their position is and what it isn't;
about what they propose; about speaking from what they know; and about
the appropriate procedure, then that person is competent to hold a
discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they don't dodge the issue; distract the discussion with
irrelevant points; or display annoyance, hate, and bitterness, then that
person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person is competent to hold a discussion
by seeing how they take part in a discussion. When a person is asked a
question, if they intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on trivial mistakes,
then that person is not competent to hold a discussion. When a person is
asked a question, if they don't intimidate, crush, mock, or seize on
trivial mistakes, then that person is competent to hold a discussion.

You can know whether or not a person has what's required by seeing how
they take part in a discussion. If they actively listen they have what's
required; if they don't actively listen they don't have what's required.
Someone who has what's required directly knows one thing, completely
understands one thing, gives up one thing, and realizes one thing---and
then they experience complete freedom. This is the purpose of
discussion, consultation, the requirements, and listening well, that is,
the liberation of the mind by not grasping.

> Those who converse with hostility,\
> too sure of themselves, arrogant,\
> ignoble, attacking virtues,\
> they look for flaws in each other.
>
> They rejoice together when their opponent\
> speaks poorly and makes a mistake,\
> becoming confused and defeated---\
> but the noble ones don't discuss like this.
>
> If an astute person wants to hold a discussion\
> connected with the teaching and its meaning---\
> the kind of discussion that noble ones hold---\
> then that wise one should start the discussion,
>
> knowing when the time is right,\
> neither hostile nor arrogant.\
> Not over-excited,\
> contemptuous, or aggressive,
>
> or with a mind full of jealousy,\
> they'd speak from what they rightly know.\
> They agree with what was well spoken,\
> without criticizing what was poorly said.
>
> They'd not persist in finding faults,\
> nor seize on trivial mistakes,\
> neither intimidating nor crushing the other,\
> nor would they speak suggestively.
>
> Good people consult\
> for the sake of knowledge and clarity.\
> That's how the noble ones consult,\
> this is a noble consultation.\
> Knowing this, an intelligent person\
> would consult without arrogance."

### N 3.68 Followers of Other Religions  *Aññatitthiyasutta* {#n-3.68-followers-of-other-religions-aññatitthiyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' How would you answer
them?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, if wanderers of other religions were to ask: 'There are
these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. These are the
three things. What's the difference between them?' You should answer
them: 'Greed, reverends, is mildly blameworthy, but slow to fade away.
Hate is very blameworthy, but quick to fade away. Delusion is very
blameworthy, and slow to fade away.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The
beautiful feature of things. When you apply the mind irrationally to the
beautiful feature of things, greed arises, and once arisen it increases
and grows. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed arises, and
once arisen it increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate arises,
and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say: 'The feature of
harshness. When you apply the mind irrationally to the feature of
harshness, hate arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is
the cause, this is the reason why hate arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask: 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
arises, and once arisen it increases and grows?' You should say:
'Irrational application of mind. When you apply the mind irrationally,
delusion arises, and once arisen it increases and grows. This is the
cause, this is the reason why delusion arises, and once arisen it
increases and grows.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why greed
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'The ugly feature of things. When you apply the mind rationally on the
ugly feature of things, greed doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why greed doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say: 'The
heart's release by love.' When you apply the mind rationally on the
heart's release by love, hate doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen
it's given up. This is the cause, this is the reason why hate doesn't
arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up.'

And if they ask, 'What is the cause, what is the reason why delusion
doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up?' You should say:
'Rational application of mind. When you apply the mind rationally,
delusion doesn't arise, or if it's already arisen it's given up. This is
the cause, this is the reason why delusion doesn't arise, or if it's
already arisen it's given up.'"

### N 3.69 Unskillful Roots  *Akusalamūlasutta* {#n-3.69-unskillful-roots-akusalamūlasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three unskillful roots. What three? Greed,
hate, and delusion.

Greed is a root of the unskillful. When a greedy person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a greedy
person, overcome by greed, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by greed.

Hate is a root of the unskillful. When a hateful person chooses to act
by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a hateful
person, overcome by hate, causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that too is
unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced in
them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by hate.

Delusion is a root of the unskillful. When a deluded person chooses to
act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is unskillful. When a
deluded person, overcome by delusion, causes another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is unskillful. And so these many bad, unskillful things are produced
in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by delusion. Such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person causes another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they're scornful and admit nothing. When
someone makes a baseless criticism, they make no effort to explain,
'This is why that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a
person is said to have speech that's ill-timed, false, meaningless, not
in line with the teaching and training.

Such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born of greed,
hate, and delusion---suffers in this very life, with distress, anguish,
and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect to
be reborn in a bad place.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. It would fall to ruin and disaster. In the
same way, such a person---overcome with bad, unskillful qualities born
of greed, hate, and delusion---suffers in this very life, with distress,
anguish, and fever. And when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect to be reborn in a bad place.

These are the three unskillful roots.

There are these three skillful roots. What three? Contentment, love, and
understanding.

Contentment is a root of the skillful. When a contented person chooses
to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a
contented person, not overcome by greed, doesn't cause another to suffer
under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by contentment.

Love is a root of the skillful. When a loving person chooses to act by
way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful. When a loving
person, not overcome by hate, doesn't cause another to suffer under a
false pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or
condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power', that
too is skillful. And so these many skillful things are produced in them,
born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by love.

Understanding is a root of the skillful. When an understanding person
chooses to act by way of body, speech, or mind, that too is skillful.
When an understanding person, not overcome by delusion, doesn't cause
another to suffer under a false pretext---by execution or imprisonment
or confiscation or condemnation or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful,
I want power', that too is skillful. And so these many skillful things
are produced in them, born, sourced, originated, and conditioned by
understanding. Such a person is said to have speech that's well-timed,
true, meaningful, in line with the teaching and training.

Why is this? This person doesn't cause another to suffer under a false
pretext---by execution or imprisonment or confiscation or condemnation
or banishment---thinking 'I'm powerful, I want power'. So when someone
makes a valid criticism, they admit it and aren't scornful. When someone
makes a baseless criticism, they make an effort to explain, 'This is why
that's untrue, this is why that's false.' That's why such a person is
said to have speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful, in line with
the teaching and training.

For such a person, bad unskillful qualities born of greed, hate, and
delusion are cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated,
and unable to arise in the future. In this very life they're happy, free
of distress, anguish, and fever, and they're also extinguished in this
very life.

Suppose a sal, axlewood, or boxwood tree was choked and engulfed by
three camel's foot creepers. Then along comes a person with a spade and
basket. They'd cut the creeper out by the roots, dig them up, and pull
them out, down to the fibers and stems. Then they'd split the creeper
apart, cut up the parts, and chop it into splinters. They'd dry the
splinters in the wind and sun, burn them with fire, and reduce them to
ashes. Then they'd sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream. So those camel's foot creepers would be cut
off at the root, made like a palm stump, and obliterated, unable to
arise in the future. In the same way, for such a person, bad unskillful
qualities born of greed, hate, and delusion are cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.
In this very life they're happy, free of distress, anguish, and fever,
and they're also extinguished in this very life.

These are the three skillful roots."

### N 3.70 Sabbath  *Uposathasutta* {#n-3.70-sabbath-uposathasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying near
[Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in the stilt longhouse of [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s
mother in the Eastern Monastery.

Then [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, [Migāra]{lang="sa"}'s mother, went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to her, "So,
[Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, where are you coming from in the middle of the
day?"

"Today, sir, I'm observing the sabbath."

"There are, [Visākhā]{lang="sa"}, these three sabbaths. What three? The
sabbath of the cowherds, the sabbath of the Jains, and the sabbath of
the noble ones.

And what is the sabbath of the cowherds? It's just like a cowherd who,
in the late afternoon, takes the cows back to their owners. They
reflect: 'Today the cows grazed in this spot and that, and they drank in
this spot and that. Tomorrow the cows will graze in this spot and that,
and drink in this spot and that.' In the same way, someone keeping the
sabbath reflects: 'Today I ate this and that, and had a meal of this and
that. Tomorrow I'll eat this and that, and have a meal of this and
that.' And so they spend their day with a mind full of covetousness.
That's the sabbath of the cowherds. When the cowherd's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the Jains? There's a kind of ascetic
belonging to a group called the Jains. They encourage their disciples:
'Please, good people, don't hurt any living creatures more than a
hundred leagues away to the east. Don't hurt any living creatures more
than a hundred leagues away to the west. Don't hurt any living creatures
more than a hundred leagues away to the north. Don't hurt any living
creatures more than a hundred leagues away to the south.' So they
encourage kindness and sympathy for some creatures and not others. On
the sabbath, they encourage their disciples: 'Please, good people, take
off all your clothes and say: "I don't belong to anyone anywhere! And
nothing belongs to me anywhere!"' But their mother and father still
know, 'This is our child.' And they know, 'This is my mother and
father.' Partner and child still know, 'This is our supporter.' And they
know, 'This is my partner and child.' Bondservants, workers, and staff
still know: 'This is our master.' And they know, 'These are my
bondservants, workers, and staff.' So, at a time when they should be
encouraged to speak the truth, the Jains encourage them to lie. This, I
say, is lying. When the night has passed they use their possessions once
more, though they've not been given back to them. This, I say, is
stealing. That's the sabbath of the Jains. When the Jain's sabbath is
observed like this it's not very fruitful or beneficial or splendid or
bountiful.

And what is the sabbath of the noble ones? A corrupt mind is cleaned by
applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort?
It's when a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect
the Realized One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty head by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty head cleaned by applying effort? With cleansing
paste, clay, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. In the
same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' As they recollect the Realized
One, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are
given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes the sabbath of
the divinity, living together with the divinity. And because they think
of the divinity their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind is cleaned by
applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' As they recollect
the teaching, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty body by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty body cleaned by applying effort? With cleanser and
powder, water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty body is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the
Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.' As they recollect the teaching, their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A
noble disciple who observes the sabbath of Dhamma, living together with
Dhamma. And because they think of the Dhamma their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples
is practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' As they recollect the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleaning a dirty cloth by
applying effort.

And how is a dirty cloth cleaned by applying effort? With salt, lye, cow
dung, and water, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty cloth is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of
the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way that's good, direct,
systematic, and proper. It consists of the four pairs, the eight
individuals. This [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is
worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of a religious donation, and worthy of veneration with joined palms. It
is the supreme field of merit for the world.' As they recollect the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes
the sabbath of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, living together with the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. And because they think of the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}
their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given
up.' That's how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects their
own ethical conduct, which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. As they recollect their ethical conduct, their
mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.
It's just like cleaning a dirty mirror by applying effort.

And how is a dirty mirror cleaned by applying effort? With oil, ash, a
rolled-up cloth, and by applying the appropriate effort. That's how a
dirty mirror is cleaned by applying effort. In the same way, a corrupt
mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects their own ethical conduct, which is intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. As they recollect their
ethical conduct, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A noble disciple who observes
the sabbath of ethical conduct, living together with ethics. And because
they think of their ethical conduct their mind becomes clear, joy
arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's how a corrupt mind
is cleaned by applying effort.

A corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort. And how is a corrupt mind
cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble disciple recollects the
deities: 'There are the gods of the four great kings, the gods of the
thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to
imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by others, the gods of
the Divinity's host, and gods even higher than these. When those deities
passed away from here, they were reborn there because of their faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.' As they recollect the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
those deities, their mind becomes clear, joy arises, and mental
corruptions are given up. It's just like cleansing corrupt native gold
by applying effort.

And how is corrupt native gold cleansed by applying effort? With a
furnace, flux, a blowpipe, and tongs, and by applying the appropriate
effort. That's how corrupt native gold is cleansed by applying effort.
In the same way, a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

And how is a corrupt mind cleaned by applying effort? It's when a noble
disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the gods of the four great
kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama, the joyful gods,
the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what is imagined by
others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and gods even higher than
these. When those deities passed away from here, they were reborn there
because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I,
too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom.' As they recollect the faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom of both themselves and those deities, their mind becomes clear,
joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up. This is called: 'A
noble disciple who observes the sabbath of the deities, living together
with the deities. And because they think of the deities their mind
becomes clear, joy arises, and mental corruptions are given up.' That's
how a corrupt mind is cleaned by applying effort.

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'As long as they live, the perfected
ones give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword.
They are scrupulous and kind, and live full of sympathy for all living
beings. I, too, for this day and night will give up killing living
creatures, renouncing the rod and the sword. I'll be scrupulous and
kind, and live full of sympathy for all living beings. I will observe
the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up stealing. They take
only what's given, and expect only what's given. They keep themselves
clean by not thieving. I, too, for this day and night will give up
stealing. I'll take only what's given, and expect only what's given.
I'll keep myself clean by not thieving. I will observe the sabbath by
doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up unchastity. They are
celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I, too, for this
day and night will give up unchastity. I will be celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex. I will observe the sabbath by doing as
the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up lying. They speak the
truth and stick to the truth. They're honest and trustworthy, and don't
trick the world with their words. I, too, for this day and night will
give up lying. I'll speak the truth and stick to the truth. I'll be
honest and dependable, and won't trick the world with my words. I will
observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. I, too, for this day and night will give up beer, wine, and
liquor intoxicants. I will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected
ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones eat in one part of the day,
abstaining from eating at night and from food at the wrong time. I, too,
for this day and night will eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night and food at the wrong time. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones refrain from seeing shows of
dancing, singing, and music; and beautifying and adorning themselves
with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I, too, for this day and night
will refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music ; and
beautifying and adorning myself with garlands, fragrance, and makeup. I
will observe the sabbath by doing as the perfected ones do in this
respect.

As long as they live, the perfected ones give up high and luxurious
beds. They sleep in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I, too,
for this day and night will give up high and luxurious beds. I'll sleep
in a low place, either a cot or a straw mat. I will observe the sabbath
by doing as the perfected ones do in this respect.'

That's the sabbath of the noble ones. When the sabbath of the noble ones
is observed like this it's very fruitful and beneficial and splendid and
bountiful.

How much so? Suppose you were to rule as sovereign lord over these
sixteen great countries---[Aṅga]{lang="sa"}, Magadha, [Kāsi]{lang="sa"},
Kosala, Vajji, Malla, [Cetī]{lang="sa"}, Vaccha, Kuru,
[Pañcāla]{lang="sa"}, Maccha, [Sūrasena]{lang="sa"}, Assaka, Avanti,
[Gandhāra]{lang="sa"}, and Kamboja---full of the seven treasures. This
wouldn't be worth a sixteenth part of the sabbath with its eight
factors. Why is that? Because human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.

Fifty years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of the
four great kings. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The lifespan of the gods of the four great kings is five
hundred of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
four great kings. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

A hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods of
the thirty-three. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months
make up a year. The lifespan of the gods of the thirty-three is a
thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man
who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods of the
thirty-three. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Two hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
of Yama. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make up a
year. The lifespan of the gods of Yama is two thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods of Yama. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Four hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
joyful gods. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such months make
up a year. The lifespan of the joyful gods is four thousand of these
heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed
the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the joyful gods. This is what I was
referring to when I said: 'Human kingship is a poor thing compared to
the happiness of the gods.'

Eight hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the gods
who love to imagine. Thirty such days make up a month. Twelve such
months make up a year. The lifespan of the gods who love to imagine is
eight thousand of these heavenly years. It's possible that some woman or
man who has observed the eight-factored sabbath will---when their body
breaks up, after death---be reborn in the company of the gods who love
to imagine. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human kingship
is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

Sixteen hundred years in the human realm is one day and night for the
gods who control what is imagined by others. Thirty such days make up a
month. Twelve such months make up a year. The lifespan of the gods who
control what is imagined by others is sixteen thousand of these heavenly
years. It's possible that some woman or man who has observed the
eight-factored sabbath will---when their body breaks up, after
death---be reborn in the company of the gods who control what is
imagined by others. This is what I was referring to when I said: 'Human
kingship is a poor thing compared to the happiness of the gods.'

> You shouldn't kill living creatures, or steal,\
> or lie, or drink liquor.\
> Be celibate, refraining from sex,\
> and don't eat at night, the wrong time.
>
> Not wearing garlands or applying fragrance,\
> you should sleep on a low bed,\
> \>or a mat on the ground.\
> This is the eight-factored sabbath, they say,\
> explained by the Buddha,\
> \>who has gone to suffering's end.
>
> The moon and sun are both fair to see,\
> radiating as far as they revolve.\
> Those dispellers of darkness, travellers in midair,\
> shine in the firmament, lighting up the quarters.
>
> All of the wealth that's found in this realm---\
> pearls, gems, fine beryl too,\
> mountain gold or lustrous gold,\
> or the native gold called 'coruscant'---
>
> they're not worth a sixteenth part\
> of the sabbath with its eight factors,\
> as starlight cannot rival the moon.
>
> So an ethical woman or man,\
> who has observed the eight-factored sabbath,\
> having made merit whose outcome is happiness,\
> blameless, they go to a heavenly place."

## The Chapter with Ānanda  {#the-chapter-with-ānanda .unnumbered}

### N 3.71 With Channa  *Channasutta* {#n-3.71-with-channa-channasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's
Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s monastery. Then the wanderer Channa
went up to Venerable Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, do you advocate giving up greed, hate, and delusion?"

"We do, reverend."

"But what drawbacks have you seen, Reverend Ānanda, that you advocate
giving up greed, hate, and delusion?"

"A greedy person, overcome by greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
greed has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness. A
greedy person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
greed has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. A greedy person doesn't truly understand what's for
their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. When greed has
been given up, they truly understand what's for their own good, the good
of another, or the good of both. Greed is a destroyer of sight, vision,
and knowledge. It blocks wisdom, it's on the side of distress, and it
doesn't lead to extinguishment.

A hateful person, overcome by hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. ...

A deluded person, overcome by delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They experience mental pain and sadness. When
delusion has been given up, they don't intend to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. They don't experience mental pain and sadness. A
deluded person does bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. When
delusion has been given up, they don't do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. A deluded person doesn't truly understand what's for
their own good, the good of another, or the good of both. When delusion
has been given up, they truly understand what's for their own good, the
good of another, or the good of both. Delusion is a destroyer of sight,
vision, and knowledge; it blocks wisdom, it's on the side of distress,
and it doesn't lead to extinguishment.

This is the drawback we've seen in greed, hate, and delusion, and this
is why we advocate giving them up."

"But, reverend, is there a path and a practice for giving up that greed,
hate, and delusion?"

"There is, reverend, a path and a practice for giving up that greed,
hate, and delusion."

"Well, what is it?"

"It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is the path, this is the
practice for giving up that greed, hate, and delusion."

"This is a fine path, a fine practice, for giving up that greed, hate,
and delusion. Just this much is enough to be diligent."

### N 3.72 A Disciple of the Ājīvakas  *Ājīvakasutta* {#n-3.72-a-disciple-of-the-ājīvakas-ājīvakasutta .unnumbered}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near [Kosambī]{lang="sa"}, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then a householder who was a disciple of the
[Ājīvaka]{lang="sa"} ascetics went up to Venerable Ānanda, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, whose teaching is well explained? Who in the world is
practicing well? Who in the world has done well?"

"Well then, householder, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, householder? Is the teaching of
those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion well explained
or not? Or how do you see this?"

"The teaching of those who teach for giving up greed, hate, and delusion
is well explained. That's how I see it."

"What do you think, householder? Are those who practice for giving up
greed, hate, and delusion practicing well or not? Or how do you see
this?"

"Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion are
practicing well. That's how I see it."

"What do you think, householder? Have those who've given up greed, hate,
and delusion---so they're cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future---done well in the world,
or not? Or how do you see this?"

"Those who've given up greed, hate, and delusion have done well in the
world. That's how I see it."

"So, householder, you've declared: 'The teaching of those who teach for
giving up greed, hate, and delusion is well explained.' And you've
declared: 'Those who practice for giving up greed, hate, and delusion
are practicing well.' And you've declared: 'Those who've given up greed,
hate, and delusion have done well in the world.'"

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! There's no acclaiming your own
teaching or disrespecting someone else's, just teaching what's relevant
in that context. The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved.
You, sir, teach Dhamma for giving up greed, hate, and delusion. Your
teaching is well explained. You, sir, practice for giving up greed,
hate, and delusion. You in the world are practicing well. You've given
up greed, hate, and delusion. You in the world have done well.

Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Master Ānanda has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge
to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. From this day forth, may Master Ānanda remember me
as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

### N 3.73 With Mahānāma the Sakyan  *Mahānāmasakkasutta* {#n-3.73-with-mahānāma-the-sakyan-mahānāmasakkasutta .unnumbered}

[So I have heard.]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, near Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Now
at that time the Buddha had recently recovered from an illness. Then
[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him:

"For a long time, sir, I have understood your teaching like this:
'Knowledge is for those with immersion, not those without immersion.'
But, sir, does immersion come first, then knowledge? Or does knowledge
come first, then immersion?"

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "The Buddha has recently recovered from
an illness, and this [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} asks him a question that's
too deep. Why don't I take him off to one side and teach him the
Dhamma?"

Then Ānanda took [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} by the arm, led him off to one
side, and said to him, "[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}, the Buddha has spoken of
the ethics, immersion, and wisdom of a trainee; and the ethics,
immersion, and wisdom of an adept. What is the ethics of a trainee? It's
when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting
themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger
in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is
called the ethics of a trainee.

And what is the immersion of a trainee? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called the immersion of
a trainee.

And what is the wisdom of a trainee? They truly understand: 'This is
suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the
cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called the wisdom of a trainee.

Then a noble disciple---accomplished in ethics, immersion, and
wisdom---realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements.

In this way the Buddha has spoken of the ethics, immersion, and wisdom
of both a trainee and an adept."

### N 3.74 Jains  *Nigaṇṭhasutta* {#n-3.74-jains-nigaṇṭhasutta .unnumbered}

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, at
the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then the Licchavis
Abhaya and [Paṇḍitakumāra]{lang="sa"} went up to Venerable Ānanda,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, the Jain ascetic of the [Ñātika]{lang="sa"} clan claims to be
all-knowing and all-seeing, to know and see everything without
exception, thus: 'Knowledge and vision are constantly and continually
present to me, while walking, standing, sleeping, and waking.' He
advocates the elimination of past deeds by fervent mortification, and
breaking the bridge by not doing any new deeds. So with the ending of
deeds, suffering ends; with the ending of suffering, feeling ends; and
with the ending of feeling, all suffering will have been worn away. This
is how to go beyond suffering by means of this purification by wearing
away in the present life. What, sir, does the Buddha say about this?"

"Abhaya, these three kinds of purification by wearing away have been
rightly explained by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha. They are in order to purify sentient
beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and
sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment. What
three?

It's when, Abhaya, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic
code, conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable
places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules
they've undertaken. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Then a mendicant accomplished in ethics, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Then a mendicant accomplished in immersion realizes the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. They don't perform any new deeds, and old deeds are
eliminated by experiencing their results little by little. This wearing
away is apparent in the present life, immediately effective, inviting
inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

These are the three kinds of purification by wearing away that have been
rightly explained by the Buddha ... in order to realize extinguishment."

When he said this, [Paṇḍitakumāra]{lang="sa"} said to Abhaya, "Dear
Abhaya, is there anything in what Ānanda has said so well that you would
disagree with?"

"How could I not agree with what was said so well by Ānanda? If anyone
didn't agree with him, their head would explode!"

### N 3.75 Support  *Nivesakasutta* {#n-3.75-support-nivesakasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening
to---friends and colleagues, relatives and family---should be
encouraged, supported, and established in three things. What three?

Experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

Experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained
by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.'

Experiential confidence in the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}: 'The
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.'

There might be change in the four principal states---earth, water, air,
and fire---but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the
Buddha would never change. In this context, 'change' means that such a
noble disciple will be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost
realm: this is quite impossible.

There might be change in the four principal states---earth, water, air,
and fire---but a noble disciple with experiential confidence in the
teaching ... or the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} would never change. In this
context, 'change' means that such a noble disciple will be reborn in
hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm: this is quite impossible.

Those who you have sympathy for, and those worth listening to---friends
and colleagues, relatives and family---should be encouraged, supported,
and established in these three things."

### N 3.76 Continued Existence (1st)  *Paṭhamabhavasutta* {#n-3.76-continued-existence-1st-paṭhamabhavasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'continued existence'. How is
continued existence defined?"

"If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would
continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a lower realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would
continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a middle realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued
existence in the formless realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The consciousness of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a higher realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.
That's how continued existence is defined."

### N 3.77 Continued Existence (2nd)  *Dutiyabhavasutta* {#n-3.77-continued-existence-2nd-dutiyabhavasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'continued existence'. How is
continued existence defined?"

"If, Ānanda, there were no deeds to result in the sensual realm, would
continued existence in the sensual realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a lower realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the realm of luminous form, would
continued existence in the realm of luminous form still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, Ānanda, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving
is the moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a middle realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.

If there were no deeds to result in the formless realm, would continued
existence in the formless realm still come about?"

"No, sir."

"So, deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the
moisture. The intention and aim of sentient beings---shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving---is established in a higher realm.
That's how there is rebirth into a new state of existence in the future.
That's how continued existence is defined."

### N 3.78 Precepts and Observances  *Sīlabbatasutta* {#n-3.78-precepts-and-observances-sīlabbatasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him: "Ānanda, are all precepts and observances,
lifestyles, and spiritual paths fruitful when taken as the essence?"

"This matter is not categorical, sir."

"Well then, Ānanda, break it down."

"Take the case of someone who cultivates precepts and observances, a
lifestyle, and a spiritual path, taking this as the essence. If
unskillful qualities grow while skillful qualities decline, that's not
fruitful. However, if unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow, that is fruitful."

That's what Ānanda said, and the teacher approved.

Then Ānanda, knowing that the teacher approved, got up from his seat,
bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right,
before leaving. Then, not long after Ānanda had left, the Buddha
addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, Ānanda is a trainee, but it's not
easy to find his equal in wisdom."

### N 3.79 Fragrances  *Gandhajātasutta* {#n-3.79-fragrances-gandhajātasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, there are these three kinds of fragrance that spread only with the
wind, not against it. What three? The fragrance of roots, heartwood, and
flowers. These are the three kinds of fragrance that spread only with
the wind, not against it. Is there a kind of fragrance that spreads with
the wind, and against it, and both ways?"

"There is, Ānanda, such a kind of fragrance."

"So what, sir, is that kind of fragrance?"

"It's when, Ānanda, in some village or town, a woman or man has gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. They're ethical, of good
character. They live at home with a heart rid of the stain of
stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to
charity, loving to give and to share.

Ascetics and brahmins everywhere praise them for these good qualities;
even the deities praise them. This is the kind of fragrance that spreads
with the wind, and against it, and both.

> The fragrance of flowers\
> \>doesn't spread against the wind,\
> nor sandalwood, pinwheel flowers, or jasmine;\
> but the fragrance of the good\
> \>spreads against the wind;\
> a true person's virtue spreads in every direction."

### N 3.80 Lesser  *Cūḷanikāsutta* {#n-3.80-lesser-cūḷanikāsutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Ānanda, the Buddha [Sikhī]{lang="sa"} had a disciple called
[Abhibhū]{lang="sa"}. Standing in the realm of divinity, he could make
his voice heard throughout the thousandfold galaxy.' I wonder how far a
Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha can make their
voice heard?"

"He was a disciple, Ānanda. Realized Ones are immeasurable."

For a second time ...

For a third time, Ānanda said to the Buddha: "... I wonder how far a
Blessed One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha can make their
voice heard?"

"Ānanda, have you heard of a thousandfold lesser world system, a
galaxy?"

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
speak. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, a galaxy extends a thousand times as far as the moon and sun
revolve and the shining ones light up the quarters. In that galaxy there
are a thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of
mountains, a thousand Black Plum Tree Lands, a thousand Western
Continents, a thousand Northern Continents, a thousand Eastern
Continents, four thousand oceans, four thousand great kings, a thousand
realms of the gods of the four great kings, a thousand realms of the
gods of the thirty-three, of the gods of Yama, of the joyful gods, of
the gods who love to imagine, of the gods who control what is imagined
by others, and a thousand realms of divinity. This is called a
thousandfold lesser world system, a 'galaxy'.

A world system that extends for a thousand galaxies is called a
millionfold middling world system, a 'galactic cluster'.

A world system that extends for a thousand galactic clusters is called a
billionfold great world system, a 'galactic supercluster'.

If he wished, Ānanda, a Realized One could make his voice heard
throughout a galactic supercluster, or as far as he wants."

"But how would the Buddha make his voice heard so far?"

"First, Ānanda, a Realized One would fill the galactic supercluster with
light. When sentient beings saw the light, the Realized One would
project his call so that they'd hear the sound. That's how a Realized
One could make his voice heard throughout a galactic supercluster, or as
far as he wants."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said, "I'm so fortunate, so very
fortunate, to have a teacher with such power and might!"

When he said this, Venerable [Udāyī]{lang="sa"} said to Venerable
Ānanda, "What is it to you, Reverend Ānanda, if your teacher has such
power and might?"

When he said this, the Buddha said to Venerable [Udāyī]{lang="sa"}, "Not
so, [Udāyī]{lang="sa"}, not so! If Ānanda were to die while still not
free of greed, he would rule as king of the gods for seven lifetimes, or
as king of the Black Plum Tree Land for seven lifetimes, because of the
confidence of his heart. However, Ānanda will be fully extinguished in
this very life."

## The Chapter on Ascetics  {#the-chapter-on-ascetics .unnumbered}

### N 3.81 Ascetics  *Samaṇasutta* {#n-3.81-ascetics-samaṇasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three duties of an ascetic. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three duties of an ascetic.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.82 The Donkey  *Gadrabhasutta* {#n-3.82-the-donkey-gadrabhasutta .unnumbered}

"Suppose, mendicants, a donkey followed behind a herd of cattle,
thinking: 'I can moo too! I can moo too!' But it doesn't look like a
cow, or sound like a cow, or leave a footprint like a cow. Still it
follows behind a herd of cattle, thinking: 'I can moo too! I can moo
too!'

In the same way, some mendicant follows behind the mendicant
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, thinking: 'I'm a monk too! I'm a monk too!' But
they don't have the same enthusiasm for undertaking the training in the
higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom as the other
mendicants. Still they follow behind the mendicant [Saṇgha]{lang="sa"},
thinking: 'I'm a monk too! I'm a monk too!'

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.83 Fields  *Khettasutta* {#n-3.83-fields-khettasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a farmer has three primary duties. What three? A farmer
first of all makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. Next they
plant seeds in season. When the time is right, they irrigate the field
and then drain it. These are the three primary duties of a farmer.

In the same way, a mendicant has three primary duties. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three primary duties of a mendicant.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.84 The Vajji  *Vajjiputtasutta* {#n-3.84-the-vajji-vajjiputtasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then a certain Vajji monk
went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules are
recited. I'm not able to train in them."

"But monk, are you able to train in three trainings: the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom?"

"I am, sir."

"So, monk, you should train in these three trainings: the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

As you train in these, you will give up greed, hate, and delusion. Then
you won't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad."

After some time that monk trained in the higher ethics, the higher mind,
and the higher wisdom. He gave up greed, hate, and delusion. Then he
didn't do anything unskillful, or practice anything bad.

### N 3.85 A Trainee  *Sekkhasutta* {#n-3.85-a-trainee-sekkhasutta .unnumbered}

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this person called 'a trainee'. How is a trainee
defined?"

"They train, mendicant, that's why they're called 'a trainee'. What is
their training? They train in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and
the higher wisdom. They train, that's why they're called 'a trainee'.

> As a trainee trains,\
> following the straight road,\
> first they know about ending;\
> enlightenment follows in the same lifetime.
>
> Then the knowledge comes\
> such a one, freed through enlightenment,\
> with the end of the fetters of continued existence:\
> 'My freedom is unshakable.'"

### N 3.86 Training (1st)  *Paṭhamasikkhāsutta* {#n-3.86-training-1st-paṭhamasikkhāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, bound for awakening.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then
make an end of suffering.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and
immersion, but has limited wisdom. They break some lesser and minor
training rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say
they're incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their
precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting
the spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules,
but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of
that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the
training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They
keep the rules they've undertaken. They realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These training rules are not a waste,
I say."

### N 3.87 Training (2nd)  *Dutiyasikkhāsutta* {#n-3.87-training-2nd-dutiyasikkhāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, but has
limited immersion and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training
rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're
incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts
regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting the
spiritual life. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the ending
of three fetters they have at most seven rebirths. They will
transmigrate at most seven times among gods and humans and then make an
end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, they go from family
to family. They will transmigrate between two or three families and then
make an end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, they're a
one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human existence, then
make an end of suffering. With the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they're a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics and
immersion, but has limited wisdom. They break some lesser and minor
training rules, but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say
they're incapable of that. But they're constant and steady in their
precepts regarding the training rules that are fundamental, befitting
the spiritual path. They keep the rules they've undertaken. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to the
[Akaniṭṭha]{lang="sa"} realm. With the ending of the five lower fetters
they're extinguished with extra effort. With the ending of the five
lower fetters they're extinguished without extra effort. With the ending
of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon landing. With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between one life
and the next.

Take another case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics,
immersion, and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules,
but are restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of
that. But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the
training rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They
keep the rules they've undertaken. They realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These training rules are not a waste,
I say."

### N 3.88 Training (3rd)  *Tatiyasikkhāsutta* {#n-3.88-training-3rd-tatiyasikkhāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, each fortnight over a hundred and fifty training rules come
up for recitation, in which gentlemen who care for their own welfare
train. These are all included in the three trainings. What three? The
training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.
These are the three trainings that include them all.

Take the case of a mendicant who has fulfilled their ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They break some lesser and minor training rules, but are
restored. Why is that? Because I don't say they're incapable of that.
But they're constant and steady in their precepts regarding the training
rules that are fundamental, befitting the spiritual path. They keep the
rules they've undertaken.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished between one life and the next.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished upon landing.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished without extra effort.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they're extinguished with extra effort.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of the five lower
fetters they head upstream, going to the [Akaniṭṭha]{lang="sa"} realm.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, and
the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion, they're a once-returner.
They come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters,
they're a one-seeder. They will be reborn just one time in a human
existence, then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they
go from family to family. They will transmigrate between two or three
families and then make an end of suffering.

If they don't penetrate so far, with the ending of three fetters, they
have at most seven rebirths. They will transmigrate at most seven times
among gods and humans and then make an end of suffering.

So, mendicants, if you practice fully you succeed fully. If you practice
partially you succeed partially. These training rules are not a waste, I
say."

### N 3.89 Three Trainings (1st)  *Paṭhamasikkhattayasutta* {#n-3.89-three-trainings-1st-paṭhamasikkhattayasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these are the three trainings. What three? The training in
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

And what is the training in the higher ethics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is called the
training in the higher ethics.

And what is the training in the higher mind? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called
the training in the higher mind.

And what is the training in the higher wisdom? They truly understand:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. This is called the training in the higher
wisdom. These are the three trainings."

### N 3.90 Three Trainings (2nd)  *Dutiyasikkhattayasutta* {#n-3.90-three-trainings-2nd-dutiyasikkhattayasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these are the three trainings. What three? The training in
the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom.

And what is the training in the higher ethics? It's when a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is called the
training in the higher ethics.

And what is the training in the higher mind? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption ... second
absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called
the training in the higher mind.

And what is the training in the higher wisdom? It's when a mendicant
realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. This is called the training in the higher
wisdom. These are the three trainings.

> The higher ethics, the higher mind,\
> and the higher wisdom should be practiced\
> by those energetic, steadfast, and resolute,\
> practicing absorption, mindful, with guarded senses.
>
> As before, so behind;\
> as behind, so before.\
> As below, so above;\
> as above, so below.
>
> As by day, so by night;\
> as by night, so by day.\
> Having mastered every direction\
> with limitless immersion,
>
> they call them a 'trainee on the path',\
> and 'one living a pure life'.\
> But a wise one who has gone to the end of the path\
> they call a 'Buddha' in the world.
>
> With the cessation of consciousness,\
> freed by the ending of craving,\
> the liberation of their heart\
> is like a lamp going out."

### N 3.91 At Paṅkadhā  *Saṅkavāsutta* {#n-3.91-at-paṅkadhā-saṅkavāsutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} of mendicants. He arrived at a
town of the Kosalans named [Paṅkadhā]{lang="sa"}, and stayed there.

Now, at that time a monk called Kassapagotta was resident at
[Paṅkadhā]{lang="sa"}. There the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up,
and inspired the mendicants with a Dhamma talk about the training rules.
Kassapagotta became quite impatient and bitter, thinking, "This ascetic
is much too strict."

When the Buddha had stayed in [Paṅkadhā]{lang="sa"} as long as he
pleased, he set out for [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}. Traveling stage by stage,
he arrived at [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, and stayed there.

Soon after the Buddha left, Kassapagotta became quite remorseful and
regretful, thinking, "It's my loss, my misfortune, that when the Buddha
was talking about the training rules I became quite impatient and
bitter, thinking he was much too strict. Why don't I go to the Buddha
and confess my mistake to him?"

Then Kassapagotta set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and
robe, set out for [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}. Eventually he came to
[Rājagaha]{lang="sa"} and the Vulture's Peak. He went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened, saying:

"I have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of
me to become impatient and bitter when the Buddha was educating,
encouraging, firing up, and inspiring the mendicants with a Dhamma talk
about the training rules, and to think, 'This ascetic is much too
strict.' Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I will
restrain myself in future."

"Indeed, Kassapa, you made a mistake. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future.

Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who doesn't want to train
and doesn't praise taking up the training. They don't encourage other
mendicants who don't want to train to take up the training. And they
don't truthfully and correctly praise at the right time those mendicants
who do want to train. I don't praise that kind of senior mendicant. Why
is that? Because, hearing that I praised that mendicant, other
mendicants might want to keep company with them. Then they might follow
their example, which would be for their lasting harm and suffering.
That's why I don't praise that kind of senior mendicant.

Take the case of a middle mendicant who doesn't want to train ...

Take the case of a junior mendicant who doesn't want to train ... That's
why I don't praise that kind of junior mendicant.

Kassapa, take the case of a senior mendicant who does want to train and
praises taking up the training. They encourage other mendicants who
don't want to train to take up the training. And they truthfully and
correctly praise at the right time those mendicants who do want to
train. I praise that kind of senior mendicant. Why is that? Because,
hearing that I praised that mendicant, other mendicants might want to
keep company with them. Then they might follow their example, which
would be for their lasting welfare and happiness. That's why I praise
that kind of senior mendicant.

Take the case of a middle mendicant who wants to train ...

Take the case of a junior mendicant who wants to train ... That's why I
praise that kind of junior mendicant."

## The Chapter on a Lump of Salt  {#the-chapter-on-a-lump-of-salt .unnumbered}

### N 3.92 Urgent  *Accāyikasutta* {#n-3.92-urgent-accāyikasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a farmer has three urgent duties. What three? A farmer
swiftly makes sure the field is well ploughed and tilled. Next they
swiftly plant seeds in season. When the time is right, they swiftly
irrigate or drain the field. These are the three urgent duties of a
farmer. That farmer has no special power or ability to say: 'Let the
crops germinate today! Let them flower tomorrow! Let them ripen the day
after!' But there comes a time when that farmer's crops germinate,
flower, and ripen as the seasons change.

In the same way, a mendicant has three urgent duties. What three?
Undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three urgent duties of a mendicant. That
mendicant has no special power or ability to say: 'Let my mind be freed
from defilements by not grasping today! Or tomorrow! Or the day after!'
But there comes a time---as that mendicant trains in the higher ethics,
the higher mind, and the higher wisdom---that their mind is freed from
defilements by not grasping.

So you should train like this: 'We will have keen enthusiasm for
undertaking the training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.93 Seclusion  *Pavivekasutta* {#n-3.93-seclusion-pavivekasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, wanderers of other religions advocate three kinds of
seclusion. What three? Seclusion in robes, almsfood, and lodgings.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in robes.
They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. This is what
wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in robes.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
almsfood. They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce,
rice bran, scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung.
They survive on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit. This is
what the wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
almsfood.

Wanderers of other religions advocate this kind of seclusion in
lodgings. They stay in a wilderness, at the root of a tree, in a charnel
ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw, or a threshing-hut.
This is what wanderers of other religions advocate for seclusion in
lodgings. These are the three kinds of seclusion that wanderers of other
religions advocate.

In this teaching and training, there are three kinds of seclusion for a
mendicant. What three? Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, giving up
unethical conduct, being secluded from it. They have right view, giving
up wrong view, being secluded from it. They've ended defilements, giving
up defilements, being secluded from them. When a mendicant has these
three kinds of seclusion, they're called a mendicant who has reached the
peak and the pith, being pure and consolidated in the core.

When a farmer's rice field is ripe, they'd have the rice cut swiftly,
gathered swiftly, transported swiftly, made into heaps swiftly, threshed
swiftly, the straw removed swiftly, winnowed swiftly, brought over
swiftly, pounded swiftly, and have the husks removed swiftly. In this
way that farmer's crop would reach the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core.

In the same way, when a mendicant is ethical, giving up unethical
conduct, being secluded from it; when they have right view, giving up
wrong view, being secluded from it; when they've ended defilements,
giving up defilements, being secluded from them: they're called a
mendicant who has reached the peak and the pith, being pure and
consolidated in the core."

### N 3.94 Autumn  *Saradasutta* {#n-3.94-autumn-saradasutta .unnumbered}

"In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates.

In the same way, when the stainless, immaculate vision of the teaching
arises in a noble disciple, three fetters are given up: substantialist
view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances.

Afterwards they get rid of two things: covetousness and ill will. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. If that noble disciple passed away at that time, they're
bound by no fetter that might return them to this world."

### N 3.95 Assemblies  *Parisāsutta* {#n-3.95-assemblies-parisāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these are the three assemblies. What three? An assembly of
the best, a divided assembly, and a harmonious assembly.

And what is an assembly of the best? An assembly where the senior
mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders.
Instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
And those who come afterwards follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack, nor are they backsliders. Instead, they take the
lead in seclusion, rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is called
an assembly of the best.

And what is a divided assembly? An assembly where the mendicants argue,
quarrel, and dispute, continually wounding each other with barbed words.
This is called a divided assembly.

And what is a harmonious assembly? An assembly where the mendicants live
in harmony, appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. This is
called a harmonious assembly.

When the mendicants live in harmony like this, they create much merit.
At that time the mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the
heart's release by rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up.
When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the
body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind
becomes immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily on a mountain top, and the water
flows downhill to fill the hollows, crevices, and creeks. As they become
full, they fill up the pools. The pools fill up the lakes, the lakes
fill up the streams, and the streams fill up the rivers. And as the
rivers become full, they fill up the ocean.

In the same way, when the mendicants are in harmony, appreciating each
other, without quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding
each other with kindly eyes, they create much merit. At that time the
mendicants live in a divine dwelling, that is, the heart's release by
rejoicing. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is
full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil,
they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
[samādhi]{lang="sa"}.

These are the three assemblies."

### N 3.96 The Thoroughbred (1st)  *Paṭhamaājānīyasutta* {#n-3.96-the-thoroughbred-1st-paṭhamaājānīyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and reckoned as a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant truly understands:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

### N 3.97 The Thoroughbred (2nd)  *Dutiyaājānīyasutta* {#n-3.97-the-thoroughbred-2nd-dutiyaājānīyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king, ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of
the five lower fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. That's how a
mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

### N 3.98 The Thoroughbred (3rd)  *Tatiyaājānīyasutta* {#n-3.98-the-thoroughbred-3rd-tatiyaājānīyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with three factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and considered a factor of kingship. What
three? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred is beautiful, strong, and
fast. A fine royal thoroughbred with these three factors is worthy of a
king. ...

In the same way, a mendicant with three qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? It's when a mendicant is
beautiful, strong, and fast.

And how is a mendicant beautiful? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. That's how a mendicant is
beautiful.

And how is a mendicant strong? It's when a mendicant lives with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. That's how a mendicant is
strong.

And how is a mendicant fast? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. That's how a mendicant is fast.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

### N 3.99 Jute  *Potthakasutta* {#n-3.99-jute-potthakasutta .unnumbered}

"Jute canvas is ugly, unpleasant to touch, and worthless whether it's
new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out jute canvas for scrubbing
pots, or else they just throw it away on the rubbish heap.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is unethical, of bad character,
this is how they're ugly, I say. That person is just as ugly as jute
canvas. If you associate with, accompany, and attend to that person,
following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and suffering.
This is how they're unpleasant to touch, I say. That person is just as
unpleasant to touch as jute canvas. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick that they receive are not very
fruitful or beneficial for the donor. This is how they're worthless, I
say. That person is just as worthless as jute canvas.

If a middle mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is unethical, of bad character, this is how
they're ugly, I say. ... If you associate with, accompany, and attend to
that person, following their example, it'll be for your lasting harm and
suffering. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks among the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the
mendicants say: 'What's an incompetent fool like you got to say? How on
earth could you imagine you've got something worth saying!' That person
becomes angry and upset, and blurts out things that make the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} throw them out, as if they were throwing jute canvas
away on the rubbish heap.

Cloth from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"} is beautiful, pleasant to touch, and
valuable whether it's new, worn in, or worn out. They use worn out cloth
from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"} for wrapping, or else they place it in a fragrant
casket.

In the same way, if a junior mendicant is ethical, of good character,
this is how they're beautiful, I say. That person is just as beautiful
as cloth from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}. If you associate with, accompany, and
attend to such a person, following their example, it will be for your
lasting welfare and happiness. This is how they're pleasant to touch, I
say. That person is just as pleasant to touch as cloth from
[Kāsi]{lang="sa"}. Any robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick that they receive are very fruitful and beneficial
for the donor. This is how they're valuable, I say. That person is just
as valuable as cloth from [Kāsi]{lang="sa"}.

If a middle mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If a senior mendicant is ethical, of good character, this is how they're
beautiful, I say. ...

If such a senior mendicant speaks in the midst of the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}, the mendicants say: 'Venerables, be quiet! The
senior mendicant is speaking on the teaching and training.'

So you should train like this: 'We will be like cloth from
[Kāsi]{lang="sa"}, not like jute canvas.' That's how you should train."

### N 3.100 A Lump of Salt  *Loṇakapallasutta* {#n-3.100-a-lump-of-salt-loṇakapallasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a
deed, they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual
life could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering.

Take the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them
in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad deed, but
experiences it in this life, without even a bit left over, let alone a
lot.

What kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell?
A person who hasn't developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, or
wisdom. They're small-minded and mean-spirited, living in suffering.
That kind of person does a trivial bad deed, but it lands them in hell.

What kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it
in this life, without even a bit left over, let alone a lot? A person
who has developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.
They're not small-minded, but are big-hearted, living without limits.
That kind of person does the same trivial bad deed, but experiences it
in this life, without even a bit left over, not to speak of a lot.

Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into a mug of water. What do
you think, mendicants? Would that mug of water become salty and
undrinkable?"

"Yes, sir. Why is that? Because there is only a little water in the
bowl."

"Suppose a person was to drop a lump of salt into the Ganges river. What
do you think, mendicants? Would the Ganges river become salty and
undrinkable?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because the Ganges river is a vast mass of
water."

"This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit
left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Take the case of a person who is thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars. While another person isn't
thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred
dollars.

What kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is poor, with few possessions
and little wealth. That kind of person is thrown in jail for stealing
half a dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

What kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a dollar, a
dollar, or a hundred dollars? A person who is rich, affluent, and
wealthy. That kind of person isn't thrown in jail for stealing half a
dollar, a dollar, or a hundred dollars.

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but they go to hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same trivial bad
deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit left over, not
to speak of a lot. ...

It's like a sheep dealer or butcher. They can execute, jail, fine, or
otherwise punish one person who steals from them, but not another.

What kind of person can they punish? A person who is poor, with few
possessions and little wealth. That's the kind of person they can
punish.

What kind of person can't they punish? A ruler or their chief minister
who is rich, affluent, and wealthy. That's the kind of person they can't
punish. In fact, all they can do is raise their joined palms and ask:
'Please, good sir, give me my sheep or pay me for it.'

This is how it is in the case of a person who does a trivial bad deed,
but it lands them in hell. Meanwhile, another person does the same
trivial bad deed, but experiences it in this life, without even a bit
left over, not to speak of a lot. ...

Mendicants, suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed,
they experience it the same way.' This being so, the spiritual life
could not be lived, and there'd be no chance of making a complete end of
suffering.

Suppose you say: 'No matter how this person performs a deed, they
experience the result as it should be experienced.' This being so, the
spiritual life can be lived, and there is a chance of making a complete
end of suffering."

### N 3.101 A Panner  *Paṁsudhovakasutta* {#n-3.101-a-panner-paṁsudhovakasutta .unnumbered}

"Native gold has coarse corruptions: sand, soil, and gravel. A panner or
their apprentice pours it into a pan, where they wash, rinse, and clean
it. When that's been eliminated, there are medium corruptions in the
native gold: fine grit and coarse sand. The panner washes it again. When
that's been eliminated, there are fine corruptions in the native gold:
fine sand and black grime. The panner washes it again. When that's been
eliminated, only golden flecks remain. A goldsmith or their apprentice
places the native gold in a crucible where they blow, melt, and smelt
it. Still the native gold is not settled and the dross is not totally
gone. It's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is brittle and not
completely ready for working. But the goldsmith keeps on blowing,
melting, and smelting it. The native gold becomes pliable, workable, and
radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can
successfully create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet,
earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant who is committed to the higher mind has
coarse corruptions: bad bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. A sincere,
capable mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and
obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are middling
corruptions: sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A sincere, capable
mendicant gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, there are fine corruptions:
thoughts of family, country, and status. A sincere, capable mendicant
gives these up, gets rid of, eliminates, and obliterates them.

When they've been given up and eliminated, only thoughts about the
teaching are left. That immersion is not peaceful or sublime or tranquil
or unified, but is held in place by forceful suppression.

But there comes a time when that mind is stilled internally; it settles,
unifies, and becomes immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}. That immersion is
peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not held in place by
forceful suppression. They extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with my hand the sun and moon, so mighty and
powerful; controlling my body as far as the realm of divinity.' They are
capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is within
range.

If they wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
They are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is
within range.

If they wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}
as "mind immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}", and mind not immersed in
[samādhi]{lang="sa"} as "mind not immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' They
are capable of realizing these things, since each and every one is
within range.

If they wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of realizing
these things, since each and every one is within range."

### N 3.102 Basis  *Nimittasutta* {#n-3.102-basis-nimittasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus on
three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity.

If a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses solely on the basis
of immersion, it's likely their mind will incline to laziness.

If they focus solely on the basis of exertion, it's likely their mind
will incline to restlessness.

If they focus solely on the basis of equanimity, it's likely their mind
won't properly become immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} for the ending of
defilements.

But when a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to
time on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} for the
ending of defilements.

It's like when a goldsmith or a goldsmith's apprentice prepares a forge,
fires the crucible, picks up some native gold with tongs and puts it in
the crucible. From time to time they fan it, from time to time they
sprinkle water on it, and from time to time they just watch over it. If
they solely fanned it, the native gold would likely be scorched. If they
solely sprinkled water on it, the native gold would likely cool down. If
they solely watched over it, the native gold would likely not be
properly processed. But when that goldsmith fans it from time to time,
sprinkles water on it from time to time, and watches over it from time
to time, that native gold becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and is ready to be worked. Then the goldsmith can successfully
create any kind of ornament they want, whether a bracelet, earrings, a
necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, a mendicant committed to the higher mind should focus
on three bases from time to time: the basis of immersion, the basis of
exertion, and the basis of equanimity. ...

When a mendicant dedicated to the higher mind focuses from time to time
on the basis of immersion, the basis of exertion, and the basis of
equanimity, their mind becomes pliable, workable, and radiant, not
brittle, and has become rightly immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"} for the
ending of defilements. They extend the mind to realize by insight each
and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they are capable of
realizing those things, since each and every one is within range.

If they wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power' ...

'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I hear both
kinds of sounds, human and divine, whether near or far.' ... 'May I
recollect many kinds of past lives.' ... 'With clairvoyance that is
purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings passing away and
being reborn.' ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' They are capable of
realizing these things, since each and every one is within range."

::: center
*[the third fifty]{.smallcaps}*
:::

## The Chapter on Awakening  {#the-chapter-on-awakening .unnumbered}

### N 3.103 Before Awakening  *Pubbevasambodhasutta* {#n-3.103-before-awakening-pubbevasambodhasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification in the world?
What's the drawback? What's the escape?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from the
world: this is its gratification.

That the world is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its
drawback.

Removing and giving up desire and greed for the world: this is its
escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I didn't announce my
supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
[Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape in this way for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect
awakening in this world with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 3.104 Gratification (1st)  *Paṭhamaassādasutta* {#n-3.104-gratification-1st-paṭhamaassādasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I went in search of the world's gratification, and I found
it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of gratification in
the world. I went in search of the world's drawbacks, and I found them.
I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the drawbacks in the
world. I went in search of escape from the world, and I found it. I've
seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from the world.

As long as I didn't truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce my supreme
perfect awakening in this world with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans.

But when I did truly understand the world's gratification, drawback, and
escape for what they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in
this world with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

### N 3.105 Gratification (2nd)  *Dutiyaassādasutta* {#n-3.105-gratification-2nd-dutiyaassādasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the world, sentient
beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But because there is gratification in
the world, sentient beings are aroused by it.

If the world had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But since the world has a drawback, sentient
beings do grow disillusioned with it.

If there were no escape from the world, sentient beings wouldn't escape
from it. But since there is an escape from the world, sentient beings do
escape from it.

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven't
escaped from this world---with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they don't live detached, liberated, with a mind free of
limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand the world's gratification,
drawback, and escape for what they are, they've escaped from this
world---with its gods, [Māras]{lang="sa"}, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans---and
they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits."

### N 3.106 Ascetics and Brahmins  *Samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta* {#n-3.106-ascetics-and-brahmins-samaṇabrāhmaṇasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand
the world's gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I
don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having
realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the world's
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are. I deem them as
true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own
insight."

### N 3.107 Wailing  *Ruṇṇasutta* {#n-3.107-wailing-ruṇṇasutta .unnumbered}

"Singing is regarded as wailing in the training of the Noble One.
Dancing is regarded as madness. Too much laughter, showing the teeth, is
regarded as childish. So break off singing and dancing; and when you're
appropriately pleased, it's enough to simply smile."

### N 3.108 Satisfaction  *Atittisutta* {#n-3.108-satisfaction-atittisutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three indulgences that never satisfy. What three?
Sleep, drinking beer and wine, and sexual intercourse. These are the
three indulgences that never satisfy."

### N 3.109 Unprotected  *Arakkhitasutta* {#n-3.109-unprotected-arakkhitasutta .unnumbered}

Then the householder [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when the mind is unprotected, deeds of body, speech, and
mind are unprotected. When deeds are unprotected, they fester. When
deeds fester, they become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are unprotected. They fester, and become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is unprotected, bodily, verbal, and
mental deeds are unprotected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind are rotten will not have a good death.

When the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are
protected. When deeds are protected, they don't fester. When deeds don't
fester, they don't become rotten. Someone whose deeds of body, speech,
and mind aren't rotten will have a good death.

It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof peak, rafters, and walls
are protected. They don't get soaked, and they don't become rotten.

In the same way, when the mind is protected, bodily, verbal, and mental
deeds are protected. ... Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind
aren't rotten will have a good death."

### N 3.110 Fallen  *Byāpannasutta* {#n-3.110-fallen-byāpannasutta .unnumbered}

Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder
[Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}:

"Householder, when the mind is fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds
are fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are fallen
will not have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a bad roof. The
roof peak, rafters, and walls fall in. In the same way, when the mind is
fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are fallen. Someone whose deeds
of body, speech, and mind are fallen will not have a good death.

When the mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not
fallen. Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen
will have a good death. It's like a bungalow with a good roof. The roof
peak, rafters, and walls are not fallen in. In the same way, when the
mind is not fallen, bodily, verbal, and mental deeds are not fallen.
Someone whose deeds of body, speech, and mind are not fallen will have a
good death."

### N 3.111 Sources (1st)  *Paṭhamanidānasutta* {#n-3.111-sources-1st-paṭhamanidānasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.
Any deed that emerges from greed, hate, or delusion---born, sourced, and
originated from greed, hate, or delusion---is unskillful, blameworthy,
results in suffering, and leads to the creation of more deeds, not their
cessation. These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise to
deeds. Any deed that emerges from contentment, love, or
understanding---born, sourced, and originated from contentment, love, or
understanding---is skillful, blameless, results in happiness, and leads
to the cessation of more deeds, not their creation. These are three
sources that give rise to deeds."

### N 3.112 Sources (2nd)  *Dutiyanidānasutta* {#n-3.112-sources-2nd-dutiyanidānasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three?

Desire comes up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the past,
future, or present. And how does desire come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? In your
heart you think about and consider things that stimulate desire and
greed in the past, future, or present. When you do this, desire comes
up, and you get attached to those things. This lust in the heart is what
I call a fetter. That's how desire comes up for things that stimulate
desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

There are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What three?
Desire doesn't come up for things that stimulate desire and greed in the
past, future, or present. And how does desire not come up for things
that stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present? You
understand the future result of things that stimulate desire and greed
in the past, future, or present. When you know this, you grow
disillusioned, your heart becomes dispassionate, and you see it with
penetrating wisdom. That's how desire doesn't come up for things that
stimulate desire and greed in the past, future, or present.

These are three sources that give rise to deeds."

## The Chapter on Bound for Loss  {#the-chapter-on-bound-for-loss .unnumbered}

### N 3.113 Bound for Loss  *Āpāyikasutta* {#n-3.113-bound-for-loss-āpāyikasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault. What three?

Someone who is unchaste, but claims to be celibate; someone who makes a
groundless accusation of unchastity against a person whose celibacy is
pure; and someone who has the view, 'There is nothing wrong with sensual
pleasures,' so they throw themselves into sensual pleasures.

These are the three who are bound for a place of loss, bound for hell,
if they don't give up this fault."

### N 3.114 Rare  *Dullabhasutta* {#n-3.114-rare-dullabhasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, the appearance of three people is rare in the world. What
three? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these three
people is rare in the world."

### N 3.115 Immeasurable  *Appameyyasutta* {#n-3.115-immeasurable-appameyyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?
Someone easy to measure, someone hard to measure, and someone who is
immeasurable.

And who is the person easy to measure? It's a person who is restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties. This is called 'a person easy to measure'.

And who is the person hard to measure? It's a person who is not
restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued. They have
established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with
unified mind and restrained faculties. This is called 'a person hard to
measure'.

And who is the immeasurable person? It's a mendicant who is perfected,
and has ended defilements. This is called 'an immeasurable person'.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.116 Imperturbable  *Āneñjasutta* {#n-3.116-imperturbable-āneñjasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three?

First, a person, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the
ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of infinite space. The lifespan of the gods of
infinite space is twenty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there
until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the
animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays
there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're
extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a learned
noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place
of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. They enjoy it and like it and find
it satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on
it often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company
of the gods of the dimension of infinite consciousness. The lifespan of
the gods of infinite consciousness is forty thousand eons. An ordinary
person stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they
go to hell or the animal realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the
Buddha stays there until the lifespan of those gods is spent, then
they're extinguished in that very life. This is the difference between a
learned noble disciple and an unlearned ordinary person as regards their
place of rebirth.

Furthermore, a person, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at all', enters and remains
in the dimension of nothingness. They enjoy it and like it and find it
satisfying. If they're set on that, committed to it, and meditate on it
often without losing it, when they die they're reborn in the company of
the gods of the dimension of nothingness. The lifespan of the gods of
nothingness is sixty thousand eons. An ordinary person stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they go to hell or the animal
realm or the ghost realm. But a disciple of the Buddha stays there until
the lifespan of those gods is spent, then they're extinguished in that
very life. This is the difference between a learned noble disciple and
an unlearned ordinary person as regards their place of rebirth.

These are the three people found in the world."

### N 3.117 Failures and Accomplishments  *Vipattisampadāsutta* {#n-3.117-failures-and-accomplishments-vipattisampadāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view. And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills
living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure
in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.118 Unfailing Dice  *Apaṇṇakasutta* {#n-3.118-unfailing-dice-apaṇṇakasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is failure in ethics? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in ethics'.

And what is failure in mind? It's when someone is covetous and
malicious. This is called 'failure in mind'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell because of failure in ethics, mind, or view. It's like
throwing unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same
way, some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell because of
failure in ethics, mind, or view.

These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in ethics,
mind, and view.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called accomplishment in
ethics.

And what is accomplishment in mind? It's when someone is content and
kind-hearted. This is called accomplishment in mind.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called accomplishment in view. Some sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm
because of accomplishment in ethics, mind, or view. It's like throwing
unfailing dice: they always fall the right side up. In the same way,
some sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm because of accomplishment in ethics,
mind, or view.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.119 Action  *Kammantasutta* {#n-3.119-action-kammantasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three failures. What three? Failure in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is failure in action? It's when someone kills living creatures,
steals, commits sexual misconduct, and uses speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'failure in action'.

And what is failure in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has wrong
livelihood and earns a living by wrong livelihood. This is called
'failure in livelihood'.

And what is failure in view? It's when someone has wrong view, a
distorted perspective, such as: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'failure in view'. These are the three failures.

There are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment in action,
livelihood, and view.

And what is accomplishment in action? It's when someone doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or use speech that's
false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'accomplishment
in action'.

And what is accomplishment in livelihood? It's when a noble disciple has
right livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood. This is called
'accomplishment in livelihood'.

And what is accomplishment in view? It's when someone has right view, an
undistorted perspective, such as: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.' This
is called 'accomplishment in view'.

These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.120 Purity (1st)  *Paṭhamasoceyyasutta* {#n-3.120-purity-1st-paṭhamasoceyyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when someone doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. This is called 'purity of
body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when someone doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind? It's when someone is content, kind-hearted,
and has right view. This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity."

### N 3.121 Purity (2nd)  *Dutiyasoceyyasutta* {#n-3.121-purity-2nd-dutiyasoceyyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of purity. What three? Purity
of body, speech, and mind.

And what is purity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'purity of body'.

And what is purity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'purity of
speech'.

And what is purity of mind?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands 'I have
sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them, they
understand 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand how
sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up; and
how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have ill will in them they understand 'I have ill will in me';
and when they don't have ill will in them they understand 'I don't have
ill will in me'. They understand how ill will arises; how, when it's
already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't
arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them they understand 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me'; and when they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them they understand 'I don't have dullness and drowsiness
in me'. They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise; how, when
they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're given
up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have restlessness and remorse in them they understand 'I have
restlessness and remorse in me'; and when they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them they understand 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me'. They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them they understand 'I have doubt in me'; and
when they don't have doubt in them they understand 'I don't have doubt
in me'. They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

This is called 'purity of mind'.

These are the three kinds of purity.

> Purity of body, purity of speech,\
> and undefiled purity of heart.\
> A pure person, blessed with purity,\
> has washed off all bad things, they say."

### N 3.122 Sagacity  *Moneyyasutta* {#n-3.122-sagacity-moneyyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three kinds of sagacity. What three?
Sagacity of body, speech, and mind.

And what is sagacity of body? It's when a mendicant doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or have sex. This is called 'sagacity of body'.

And what is sagacity of speech? It's when a mendicant doesn't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. This is called 'sagacity
of speech'.

And what is sagacity of mind? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is called 'sagacity of mind'. These are the three
kinds of sagacity.

> A sage in body, a sage in speech,\
> a sage undefiled in heart;\
> a sage, blessed with sagacity,\
> has given up everything, they say."

## The Chapter at Kusināra  {#the-chapter-at-kusināra .unnumbered}

### N 3.123 At Kusinārā  *Kusinārasutta* {#n-3.123-at-kusinārā-kusinārasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Kusinārā]{lang="sa"}, in the
Forest of Offerings. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, take the case of a mendicant living supported by a town or
village. A householder or their child approaches and invites them for
the next day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they want. When the night
has passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and
approach that householder's home, where they sit on the seat spread out.
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own
hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

The mendicant thinks: 'It's so good that this householder serves me with
delicious fresh and cooked foods.' Then they think: 'I really hope this
householder serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the
future, too.' They eat that food tied, infatuated, attached, blind to
the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. They think about it
with sensual, malicious, or cruel thoughts. A gift to such a mendicant
is not very fruitful, I say. Why is that? Because that mendicant is
negligent.

Take another case of a mendicant living supported by a town or village.
A householder or their child approaches and invites them for the next
day's meal. The mendicant accepts if they want. When the night has
passed, they robe up in the morning, take their bowl and robe, and
approach that householder's home, where they sit on the seat spread out.
The householder or their child serves and satisfies them with their own
hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

It never occurs to them: 'It's so good that the householder or their
child serves and satisfies me with their own hands with delicious fresh
and cooked foods.' They don't think: 'I really hope this householder
serves me with delicious fresh and cooked foods in the future, too.'
They eat that almsfood untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawback, and understanding the escape. They think about it with
thoughts of renunciation, good will, or harmlessness. A gift to such a
mendicant is very fruitful, I say. Why is that? Because that mendicant
is diligent."

### N 3.124 Arguments  *Bhaṇḍanasutta* {#n-3.124-arguments-bhaṇḍanasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I'm not even comfortable thinking about a place where
mendicants argue---quarreling and disputing, continually wounding each
other with barbed words---let alone going there. I come to a conclusion
about them: 'Clearly those venerables have given up three things and
cultivated three things.' What three things have they given up? Thoughts
of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. What three things have
they cultivated? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts. ... I come to a
conclusion about them: 'Clearly those venerables have given up three
things and cultivated three things.'

I feel comfortable going to a place where the mendicants live in
harmony---appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like
milk and water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes---let alone
thinking about it. I come to a conclusion about them: 'Clearly those
venerables have given up three things and cultivated three things.' What
three things have they given up? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts.
What three things have they cultivated? Thoughts of renunciation, good
will, and harmlessness. ... I come to a conclusion about them: 'Clearly
those venerables have given up three things and cultivated three
things.'"

### N 3.125 The Gotamaka Shrine  *Gotamakacetiyasutta* {#n-3.125-the-gotamaka-shrine-gotamakacetiyasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Vesālī]{lang="sa"}, at the
Gotamaka Tree-shrine. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I teach based on direct knowledge, not without direct
knowledge. I teach with reasons, not without them. I teach with a
demonstrable basis, not without it. Since this is so, you should follow
my advice and instruction. This is enough for you to feel joyful,
delighted, and happy: 'The Blessed One is a fully awakened Buddha! The
teaching is well explained! The [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"} is practicing
well!'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
thousandfold galaxy shook.

### N 3.126 Bharaṇḍu Kālāma  *Bharaṇḍukālāmasutta* {#n-3.126-bharaṇḍu-kālāma-bharaṇḍukālāmasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans when he
arrived at Kapilavatthu.

[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} the Sakyan heard that he had arrived. He went up
to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Go
into Kapilavatthu, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}, and check if there's a
suitable guest house where I can spend the night."

"Yes, sir," replied [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}. He returned to Kapilavatthu
and searched all over the city, but he couldn't see a suitable guest
house for the Buddha to spend the night.

Then [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} went up to the Buddha, and said to him, "Sir,
there's no suitable guest house in Kapilavatthu for you to spend the
night. But there is this [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} the [Kālāma]{lang="sa"},
who used to be the Buddha's spiritual companion. Why don't you spend the
night at his hermitage?"

"Go, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}, and set out a mat."

"Yes, sir," replied [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}. He went to
[Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"}'s hermitage, where he set out a mat, and got
foot-washing water ready. Then he went back to the Buddha and said to
him, "The mat and foot-washing water are set out. Please, sir, go at
your convenience."

Then the Buddha went to [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"}'s hermitage, sat down on
the seat spread out, and washed his feet.

Then it occurred to [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}, "It's too late to pay homage
to the Buddha today. He's tired. Tomorrow I'll pay homage to the
Buddha." He bowed to the Buddha and respectfully circled him, keeping
him on his right, then he left.

Then, when the night had passed, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"} the Sakyan went
up to the Buddha, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}, there are these three teachers found in the
world. What three? One teacher advocates the complete understanding of
sensual pleasures, but not of forms or feelings. One teacher advocates
the complete understanding of sensual pleasures and forms, but not of
feelings. One teacher advocates the complete understanding of sensual
pleasures, forms, and feelings. These are the three teachers found in
the world. Do these three teachers have the same goal or different
goals?"

When he said this, [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} said to [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"},
"Say they're the same, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

For a second time, [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} said, "Say they're the same,
[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

For a third time, [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} said, "Say they're the same,
[Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

The Buddha said, "Say they're different, [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}!"

Then it occurred to [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"}, "The Buddha has rebuked me
three times in front of this illustrious [Mahānāma]{lang="sa"}. Why
don't I leave Kapilavatthu?" Then [Bharaṇḍu]{lang="sa"} the
[Kālāma]{lang="sa"} left Kapilavatthu, never to return.

### N 3.127 With Hatthaka  *Hatthakasutta* {#n-3.127-with-hatthaka-hatthakasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Sāvatthī]{lang="sa"} in Jeta's
Grove, [Anāthapiṇḍika]{lang="sa"}'s monastery.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Hatthaka, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha. Thinking, "I will stand before the
Buddha," he sank and melted down, and wasn't able to stay still. It's
like when ghee or oil is poured on sand, it sinks and melts down, and
can't remain stable.

Then the Buddha said to Hatthaka, "Hatthaka, manifest a solid
life-form."

"Yes, sir," replied Hatthaka. He manifested a solid life-form, bowed to
the Buddha, and stood to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "Hatthaka, I wonder whether you still promulgate
now the teachings that you promulgated when you were a human being?"

"I still promulgate the teachings that I promulgated as a human being.
And I also promulgate teachings that I didn't promulgate as a human
being.

Just as the Buddha these days lives crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen; by rulers and their chief ministers, and monastics of other
religions and their disciples, so I live crowded by the gods. The gods
come from far away, thinking, 'We'll hear the teaching in the presence
of Hatthaka.'

Sir, I passed away without getting enough of three things. What three?
Seeing the Buddha; hearing the true teaching; and serving the
[Saṅgha]{lang="sa"}. I passed away without getting enough of these three
things.

> I could never get enough\
> of seeing the Buddha,\
> serving the [Saṅgha]{lang="sa"},\
> or hearing the teaching.
>
> Training in the higher ethics,\
> loving to hear the true teaching,\
> Hatthaka has gone to the Aviha realm\
> without getting enough of these three things."

### N 3.128 Bitter  *Kaṭuviyasutta* {#n-3.128-bitter-kaṭuviyasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Varanasi for alms. While the Buddha was walking for alms near
the cow-hitching place at the wavy leaf fig, he saw a disgruntled monk
who was looking for pleasure in external things, unmindful, without
situational awareness or immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined
faculties.

The Buddha said to him, "Monk, don't be bitter. If you're bitter,
festering with putrefaction, flies will, without a doubt, plague and
infest you."

Hearing this advice of the Buddha, that monk was struck with a sense of
urgency. Then, after the meal, on his return from almsround, the Buddha
told the mendicants what had happened. ...

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha:

"Sir, what is this 'bitterness'? What is 'putrefaction'? And what are
the 'flies'?"

"Desire is bitterness; ill will is the putrefaction; and bad, unskillful
thoughts are the flies. If you're bitter, festering with putrefaction,
flies will, without a doubt, plague and infest you.

> When your eyes and ears are unguarded,\
> and you're not restrained in your sense faculties,\
> flies---those lustful thoughts---\
> will plague you.
>
> A mendicant who's bitter,\
> festering with putrefaction,\
> is far from being extinguished,\
> distress is their lot.
>
> Whether in village or wilderness,\
> if they don't find serenity in themselves,\
> the fool, the simpleton,\
> is honored only by flies.
>
> But those who have ethics,\
> lovers of wisdom and peace,\
> they, being peaceful, sleep at ease,\
> since they've got rid of the flies."

### N 3.129 With Anuruddha (1st)  *Paṭhamaanuruddhasutta* {#n-3.129-with-anuruddha-1st-paṭhamaanuruddhasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sometimes, sir, with my clairvoyance that's purified and superhuman, I
see that females---when their body breaks up, after death---are mostly
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. How many
qualities do females have so that they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell?"

"When females have three qualities, when their body breaks up, after
death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. What three? A female lives at home with a heart full of the stain
of stinginess in the morning, jealousy at midday, and sexual desire in
the evening. When females have these three qualities, when their body
breaks up, after death, they are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell."

### N 3.130 With Anuruddha (2nd)  *Dutiyaanuruddhasutta* {#n-3.130-with-anuruddha-2nd-dutiyaanuruddhasutta .unnumbered}

Then Venerable Anuruddha went up to Venerable [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"},
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Here's the thing, Reverend [Sāriputta]{lang="sa"}. With clairvoyance
that is purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold
galaxy. My energy is roused up and unflagging, my mindfulness is
established and lucid, my body is tranquil and undisturbed, and my mind
is immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"}. But my mind is not freed from the
defilements by not grasping."

"Well, Reverend Anuruddha, when you say: 'With clairvoyance that is
purified and surpasses the human, I survey the thousandfold galaxy,'
that's your conceit. And when you say: 'My energy is roused up and
unflagging, my mindfulness is established and lucid, my body is tranquil
and undisturbed, and my mind is immersed in [samādhi]{lang="sa"},'
that's your restlessness. And when you say: 'But my mind is not freed
from the defilements by not grasping,' that's your remorse. It would be
good to give up these three things. Ignore them and apply your mind to
freedom from death."

After some time Anuruddha gave up these three things. Ignoring them, he
applied his mind to freedom from death. Then Anuruddha, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Anuruddha became one of the perfected.

### N 3.131 Under Cover  *Paṭicchannasutta* {#n-3.131-under-cover-paṭicchannasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, three things are conveyed under cover, not in the open.
What three? Females are married with a veil, not unveiled. Brahmin hymns
are conveyed under cover, not openly. Wrong view is conveyed under
cover, not in the open. These three things are conveyed under cover, not
in the open.

Three things shine in the open, not under cover. What three? The moon
shines in the open, not under cover. The sun shines in the open, not
under cover. The teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One
shine in the open, not under cover. These three things shine in the
open, not under cover."

### N 3.132 Etchings  *Lekhasutta* {#n-3.132-etchings-lekhasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, these three people are found in the world. What three? A
person like a line drawn in stone, a person like a line drawn in sand,
and a person like a line drawn in water.

And who is the person like a line drawn in stone? It's a person who is
often angry, and their anger lingers for a long time. It's like a line
drawn in stone, which isn't quickly worn away by wind and water, but
lasts for a long time. In the same way, a person is often angry, and
their anger lingers for a long time. This is called a person like a line
drawn in stone.

And who is the person like a line drawn in sand? It's a person who is
often angry, but their anger doesn't linger long. It's like a line drawn
in sand, which is quickly worn away by wind and water, and doesn't last
long. In the same way, a person is often angry, but their anger doesn't
linger long. This is called a person like a line drawn in sand.

And who is the person like a line drawn in water? It's a person who,
though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and disagreeable manner,
still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets them. It's like a line
drawn in water, which vanishes right away, and doesn't last long. In the
same way, a person, though spoken to by someone in a rough, harsh, and
disagreeable manner, still stays in touch, interacts with, and greets
them. This is called a person like a line drawn in water.

These are the three people found in the world."

## The Chapter on a Warrior  {#the-chapter-on-a-warrior .unnumbered}

### N 3.133 A Warrior  *Yodhājīvasutta* {#n-3.133-a-warrior-yodhājīvasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a warrior with three factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship. What three? He's
a long-distance shooter, a marksman, one who shatters large objects. A
warrior with these three factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is reckoned as a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with three factors is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What three? They're a long-distance
shooter, a marksman, and one who shatters large objects.

And how is a mendicant a long-distance shooter? It's when a mendicant
truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal
or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.' They truly see any kind of feeling at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* feeling---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of perception at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
perception---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.' They truly see any kind of choices at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* choices---with right understanding: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' They truly see any
kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near, *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' That's how a mendicant is a long-distance
shooter.

And how is a mendicant a marksman? It's when a mendicant truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. That's how a mendicant is a
marksman.

And how does a mendicant shatter large objects? It's when a mendicant
shatters the great mass of ignorance. That's how a mendicant shatters
large objects.

A mendicant with these three qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

### N 3.134 Assemblies  *Parisāsutta* {#n-3.134-assemblies-parisāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are these three assemblies. What three? An assembly
educated in fancy talk, an assembly educated in questioning, and an
assembly educated to the fullest extent. These are the three
assemblies."

### N 3.135 A Friend  *Mittasutta* {#n-3.135-a-friend-mittasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, you should associate with a friend who has three factors.
What three? They give what is hard to give, they do what is hard to do,
and they bear what is hard to bear. You should associate with a friend
who has these three factors."

### N 3.136 Arising  *Uppādāsutta* {#n-3.136-arising-uppādāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature
persists, this regularity of natural principles, this invariance of
natural principles: all conditions are impermanent. A Realized One
understands this and comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are
impermanent.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all conditions are suffering. A Realized One understands this and
comprehends it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes,
clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it: 'All conditions are suffering.'

Whether Realized Ones arise or not, this law of nature persists, this
regularity of natural principles, this invariance of natural principles:
all things are not-self. A Realized One understands this and comprehends
it, then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies,
analyzes, and reveals it: 'All things are not-self.'"

### N 3.137 A Hair Blanket  *Kesakambalasutta* {#n-3.137-a-hair-blanket-kesakambalasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a hair blanket is said to be the worst kind of woven cloth.
It's cold in the cold, hot in the heat, ugly, smelly, and unpleasant to
touch. In the same way, the teaching of the bamboo-staffed ascetic is
said to be the worst of all the doctrines of the various ascetics and
brahmins.

The bamboo-staffed ascetic, that silly man, has this doctrine and view:
'There is no power in deeds, action, or energy.'

Now, all the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who lived in the
past taught the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

All the perfected ones, the fully awakened Buddhas who will live in the
future will teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the
bamboo-staffed ascetic opposes them by saying: 'There is no power in
deeds, action, or energy.'

I too, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha in the present,
teach the efficacy of deeds, action, and energy. But the bamboo-staffed
ascetic opposes me by saying: 'There is no power in deeds, action, or
energy.'

It's like a trap set at the mouth of a river, which would bring harm,
suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish. In the same way that
futile man the bamboo-staffed ascetic is a trap for humans, it seems to
me. He has come into the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and
disaster of many beings."

### N 3.138 Accomplishment  *Sampadāsutta* {#n-3.138-accomplishment-sampadāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three accomplishments. What three? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three accomplishments."

### N 3.139 Growth  *Vuddhisutta* {#n-3.139-growth-vuddhisutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of growth. What three? Growth in
faith, ethics, and wisdom. These are the three kinds of growth."

### N 3.140 A Wild Colt  *Assakhaḷuṅkasutta* {#n-3.140-a-wild-colt-assakhaḷuṅkasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild
people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three wild colts? One wild colt is fast, but not beautiful
or well proportioned. Another wild colt is fast and beautiful, but not
well proportioned. While another wild colt is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three wild colts.

And what are the three wild people? One wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another wild person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. But when asked a question about the teaching or
training, they falter without answering. This is how they're not
beautiful, I say. And they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well
proportioned, I say. This is how a wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. But they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I
say. This is how a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? It's
when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the
origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This
is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how
they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or
training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful,
I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a wild person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three wild people."

### N 3.141 Excellent Horses  *Assaparassasutta* {#n-3.141-excellent-horses-assaparassasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three excellent horses and the three
excellent people. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three excellent horses? One excellent horse is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent horse is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent horse is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent horses.

"What are the three excellent people? One excellent person is fast, but
not beautiful or well proportioned. Another excellent person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another excellent person is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, but not beautiful or well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
But when asked a question about the teaching or training, they falter
without answering. This is how they're not beautiful, I say. And they
don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how
an excellent person is fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast and beautiful, but not well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer
without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. But they don't
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how an
excellent person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower fetters, is
reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are not liable to
return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a
question about the teaching or training, they answer without faltering.
This is how they're beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're
well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three excellent people."

### N 3.142 The Thoroughbred  *Assājānīyasutta* {#n-3.142-the-thoroughbred-assājānīyasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, I will teach you the three fine thoroughbred horses, and
the three fine thoroughbred people. Listen and apply your mind well, I
will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"What are the three fine thoroughbred horses? One fine thoroughbred
horse ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred horses.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? One fine thoroughbred
person ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a fine thoroughbred person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the
teaching or training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're
beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned.

These are the three fine thoroughbred people."

### N 3.143 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (1st)  *Paṭhamamoranivāpasutta* {#n-3.143-at-the-peacocks-feeding-ground-1st-paṭhamamoranivāpasutta .unnumbered}

At one time the Buddha was staying near [Rājagaha]{lang="sa"}, at the
monastery of the wanderers in the peacocks' feeding ground. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with three qualities has reached the ultimate
end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life,
the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans. What three?
The entire spectrum of an adept's ethics, immersion, and wisdom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

### N 3.144 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (2nd)  *Dutiyamoranivāpasutta* {#n-3.144-at-the-peacocks-feeding-ground-2nd-dutiyamoranivāpasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? A demonstration of psychic power, a demonstration of
revealing, and a demonstration of instruction.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

### N 3.145 At the Peacocks' Feeding Ground (3rd)  *Tatiyamoranivāpasutta* {#n-3.145-at-the-peacocks-feeding-ground-3rd-tatiyamoranivāpasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has three qualities has reached the
ultimate end, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and
humans. What three? Right view, right knowledge, and right freedom.

A mendicant with these three qualities has reached the ultimate end, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate goal. They are the best among gods and humans."

## The Chapter on Good Fortune  {#the-chapter-on-good-fortune .unnumbered}

### N 3.146 Unskillful  *Akusalasutta* {#n-3.146-unskillful-akusalasutta .unnumbered}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three?
Unskillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three?
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven."

### N 3.147 Blameworthy  *Sāvajjasutta* {#n-3.147-blameworthy-sāvajjasutta .unnumbered}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three?
Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three?
Blameless deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. Someone with these
three qualities is raised up to heaven."

### N 3.148 Unethical  *Visamasutta* {#n-3.148-unethical-visamasutta .unnumbered}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. ... Unethical deeds
by way of body, speech, and mind. ...

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. ... Ethical deeds
by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.149 Impure  *Asucisutta* {#n-3.149-impure-asucisutta .unnumbered}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. ... Impure deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. ...

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. ... Pure deeds by
way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.150 Broken (1st)  *Paṭhamakhatasutta* {#n-3.150-broken-1st-paṭhamakhatasutta .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and reproved by
sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What three? Unskillful
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What three?
Skillful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.151 Broken (2nd)  *Dutiyakhatasutta* {#n-3.151-broken-2nd-dutiyakhatasutta .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Blameworthy deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. ... Blameless deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.152 Broken (3rd)  *Tatiyakhatasutta* {#n-3.152-broken-3rd-tatiyakhatasutta .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Unethical deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. ... Ethical deeds by way of body,
speech, and mind. ..."

### N 3.153 Broken (4th)  *Catutthakhatasutta* {#n-3.153-broken-4th-catutthakhatasutta .unnumbered}

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has three qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. ... Impure deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind. ...

When an astute, competent true person has three qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. ... Pure deeds by way of body, speech,
and mind. ..."

### N 3.154 Homage  *Vandanāsutta* {#n-3.154-homage-vandanāsutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three kinds of homage. What three? By way of
body, speech, and mind. These are the three kinds of homage."

### N 3.155 Morning  *Pubbaṇhasutta* {#n-3.155-morning-pubbaṇhasutta .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, those sentient beings who do good things in the morning by
way of body, speech, and mind have a good morning.

Those sentient beings who do good things at midday by way of body,
speech, and mind have a good midday.

Those sentient beings who do good things in the evening by way of body,
speech, and mind have a good evening.

> A good star, a good fortune,\
> a good dawn, a good rising,\
> a good moment, a good hour:\
> these come with good gifts to spiritual practitioners.
>
> Worthy deeds of body,\
> verbal worthy deeds,\
> worthy deeds of mind,\
> worthy resolutions:\
> when your deeds have been worthy,\
> you get worthy benefits.
>
> Those happy with these benefits\
> flourish in the Buddha's teaching.\
> May you and all your relatives\
> be healthy and happy!"

## The Chapter on Practices  {#the-chapter-on-practices .unnumbered}

### N 3.156--162 Untitled Discourses on Three Practices  *Acelakavagga* {#n-3.156162-untitled-discourses-on-three-practices-acelakavagga .unnumbered}

"Mendicants, there are three practices. What three? The addicted
practice, the scorching practice, and the middle practice.

And what's the addicted practice? It's when someone has this doctrine
and view: 'There's nothing wrong with sensual pleasures'; so they throw
themselves into sensual pleasures. This is called the addicted practice.

And what's the scorching practice? It's when someone goes naked,
ignoring conventions. They lick their hands, and don't come or wait when
called. They don't consent to food brought to them, or food prepared on
their behalf, or an invitation for a meal. They don't receive anything
from a pot or bowl; or from someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon
or a shovel in their home; or where a couple is eating; or where there
is a woman who is pregnant, breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or
where there's a dog waiting or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or
meat or beer or wine, and drink no fermented gruel. They go to just one
house for alms, taking just one mouthful, or two houses and two
mouthfuls, up to seven houses and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one
saucer a day, two saucers a day, up to seven saucers a day. They eat
once a day, once every second day, up to once a week, and so on, even up
to once a fortnight. They live pursuing the practice of eating food at
set intervals.

They eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran,
scum from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive
on forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.

They wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags,
lodh tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings. They tear out
their hair and beard, committed to this practice. They constantly stand,
refusing seats. They squat, committed to persisting in the squatting
position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns their bed.
They're devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening. And so they live pursuing these various ways of mortifying and
tormenting the body. This is called the scorching practice.

And what's the middle practice? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... They meditate observing an aspect of the mind ...
They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen, aware, and
mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. This is
called the middle practice.

These are the three practices.

Mendicants, there are three practices. What three? The addicted
practice, the scorching practice, the middle practice.

And what's the addicted practice? ... This is called the addicted
practice.

And what is the scorching practice? ... This is called the scorching
practice.

And what's the middle practice? It's when a mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful
qualities that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not
lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. ...

They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. ...

They develop the faculty of faith ... energy ... mindfulness ...
immersion ... wisdom ...

They develop the power of faith ... energy ... mindfulness ... immersion
... wisdom ...

They develop the awakening factor of mindfulness ... investigation of
principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ...
equanimity ...

They develop right view ... right thought ... right speech ... right
action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness ...
right immersion ... This is called the middle practice. These are the
three practices."

## The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds  {#the-chapter-on-ways-of-performing-deeds .unnumbered}

### N 3.163--182 Untitled Discourses on Three Qualities  *Kammapathapeyyāla* {#n-3.163182-untitled-discourses-on-three-qualities-kammapathapeyyāla .unnumbered}

"Someone with three qualities is cast down to hell. What three? They
themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to kill living
creatures. And they approve of killing living creatures.

Someone with these three qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with three qualities is raised up to heaven. What three? They
don't themselves kill living creatures. They encourage others to not
kill living creatures. And they approve of not killing living creatures.
...

They themselves steal. They encourage others to steal. And they approve
of stealing. ...

They don't themselves steal. They encourage others to not steal. And
they approve of not stealing. ...

They themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of committing sexual
misconduct. ...

They don't themselves commit sexual misconduct. They encourage others to
not commit sexual misconduct. And they approve of not committing sexual
misconduct. ...

They themselves lie. They encourage others to lie. And they approve of
lying. ...

They don't themselves lie. They encourage others to not lie. And they
approve of not lying. ...

They themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to speak
divisively. And they approve of speaking divisively. ...

They don't themselves speak divisively. They encourage others to not
speak divisively. And they approve of not speaking divisively. ...

They themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to speak harshly.
And they approve of speaking harshly. ...

They don't themselves speak harshly. They encourage others to not speak
harshly. And they approve of not speaking harshly. ...

They themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to talk nonsense.
And they approve of talking nonsense. ...

They don't themselves talk nonsense. They encourage others to not talk
nonsense. And they approve of not talking nonsense. ...

They themselves are covetous. They encourage others to be covetous. And
they approve of covetousness. ...

They themselves are content. They encourage others to be contented. And
they approve of being contented. ...

They themselves have ill will. They encourage others to have ill will.
And they approve of having ill will. ...

They themselves are kind-hearted. They encourage others to be
kind-hearted. And they approve of kind-heartedness. ...

They themselves have wrong view. They encourage others to have wrong
view. And they approve of wrong view. ...

They themselves have right view. They encourage others to have right
view. And they approve of right view.

Someone with these three qualities is raised up to heaven."

## The Chapter on Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed  {#the-chapter-on-abbreviated-texts-beginning-with-greed .unnumbered}

### N 3.183--352 Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc.  *Rāgapeyyāla* {#n-3.183352-untitled-discourses-on-greed-etc.-rāgapeyyāla .unnumbered}

"For insight into greed, three things should be developed. What three?
Emptiness immersion; signless immersion; and undirected immersion. For
insight into greed, these three things should be developed.

For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ...

hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ... obstinacy
... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ...
insight ... complete understanding ... complete ending ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
For the letting go of negligence, these three things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE THREES IS FINISHED.
:::

## Colophon {#colophon .unnumbered}

### The Translator {#the-translator .unnumbered}

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main [Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka [Nikāya]{lang="sa"} were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

### Creation Process {#creation-process .unnumbered}

Primary source was the digital [Mahāsaṅgīti]{lang="sa"} edition of the
Pali [Tipiṭaka]{lang="sa"}. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

### The Translation {#the-translation .unnumbered}

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
[Nikāyas]{lang="sa"} with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

### About SuttaCentral {#about-suttacentral .unnumbered}

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

### About Bilara {#about-bilara .unnumbered}

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

### About SuttaCentral Editions {#about-suttacentral-editions .unnumbered}

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.
