::::::::::: center
::: large
:::

::: normalsize
*translated and introduced by*
:::

::: LARGE
[Bhikkhu Sujato]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: normalsize
AN 5--6
:::

::: Large
[]{.smallcaps}
:::

::: normalsize
:::

::: large
[SuttaCentral]{.smallcaps}
:::
:::::::::::

:::: footnotesize
*Numbered Discourses* is a translation of the Aṅguttaranikāya by Bhikkhu
Sujato.

Creative Commons Zero (CC0)

To the extent possible under law, Bhikkhu Sujato has waived all
copyright and related or neighboring rights to *Numbered Discourses*.

This work is published from Australia.

::: center
*This translation is an expression of an ancient spiritual text that has
been passed down by the Buddhist tradition for the benefit of all
sentient beings. It is dedicated to the public domain via Creative
Commons Zero (CC0). You are encouraged to copy, reproduce, adapt, alter,
or otherwise make use of this translation. The translator respectfully
requests that any use be in accordance with the values and principles of
the Buddhist community.*
:::

Web publication date

:   2018

This edition

:   2025-01-25 12:18:21

Publication type

:   paperback

Edition

:   ed5

Number of volumes

:   5

Publication ISBN

:   978-1-76132-037-8

Volume ISBN

:   978-1-76132-040-8

Publication URL

:   <https://suttacentral.net/editions/an/en/sujato>

Source URL

:   <https://github.com/suttacentral/bilara-data/tree/published/translation/en/sujato/sutta/an>

Publication number

:   scpub5

Map of Jambudīpa is by Jonas David Mitja Lang, and is released by him
under Creative Commons Zero (CC0).

Published by SuttaCentral

*SuttaCentral,\
c/o Alwis & Alwis Pty Ltd\
Kaurna Country,\
Suite 12,\
198 Greenhill Road,\
Eastwood,\
SA 5063,\
Australia*
::::

# The Book of the Fives


## The Chapter on Powers of a Trainee

### N 5.1 In Brief  *Saṁkhittasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### N 5.2 In Detail  *Vitthatasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of conscience? It's when a noble disciple has a
conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any bad, unskillful
qualities. This is called the power of conscience.

And what is the power of prudence? It's when a noble disciple is
prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to acquiring any bad,
unskillful qualities. This is called the power of prudence.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom. These are the five powers of a trainee.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.3 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they live unhappily in
this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless.
When a mendicant has these five qualities they live unhappily in this
very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has five qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, distress, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. When
a mendicant has these five qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.4 Cast Down  *Yathābhatasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy,
and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? It's
when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and
wise. A mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.5 Disrobing  *Sikkhāsutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who rejects the training and returns to a
lesser life deserves rebuttal and criticism on five legitimate grounds
in this very life. What five? 'You had no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, or wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or nun who
rejects the training and returns to a lesser life deserves rebuttal and
criticism on these five legitimate grounds in this very life.

Any monk or nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and
sadness, weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on five legitimate
grounds in this very life. What five? 'You had faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' Any monk or
nun who lives the full and pure spiritual life in pain and sadness,
weeping, with tearful face, deserves praise on these five legitimate
grounds in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.6 Becoming  *Samāpattisutta*

"Mendicants, you don't become unskillful as long as faith is established
in skillful qualities. But when faith vanishes and faithlessness takes
over, you become unskillful.

You don't become unskillful as long as conscience ... prudence ...
energy ... wisdom is established in skillful qualities.

But when wisdom vanishes and witlessness takes over, you become
unskillful."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.7 Sensual Pleasures  *Kāmasutta*

"Mendicants, sentient beings are mostly charmed by sensual pleasures.
When a gentleman has abandoned the scythe and flail and gone forth from
the lay life to homelessness, they're qualified to be called 'a faithful
renunciate from a good family'. Why is that? Because a youth can get
sensual pleasures of this kind or that. Now, all sensual pleasures are
just reckoned as 'sensual pleasures', regardless of whether they're
inferior, average, or superior.

Suppose there was a little baby boy who, because of his nursemaid's
negligence, puts a stick or stone in his mouth. The nursemaid would very
quickly notice and try to take it out. If that didn't work, she'd cradle
his head with her left hand, and take it out using a hooked finger of
her right hand, even if it drew blood. Why is that? I admit she'd know,
'This will distress the child, there's no denying.' Still, it should be
done by a nursemaid who wants what's best for him, out of kindness and
sympathy. And when the boy has grown up and has enough sense, his
nursemaid would not worry about him, thinking: 'The boy can look after
himself. He won't be negligent.'

In the same way, I still need to look after a mendicant who hasn't
finished developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom
regarding skillful qualities. But when a mendicant has finished
developing faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding
skillful qualities, I need not be concerned, thinking: 'They can look
after themselves. They won't be negligent.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.8 Failure  *Cavanasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is
faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and
doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with
these five qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true
teaching.

A mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves
in the true teaching. What five? A mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and
establishes themselves in the true teaching. A mendicant with these five
qualities doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.9 Disrespect (1st)  *Paṭhamaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities fails, and doesn't establish themselves in the true teaching.
What five? A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant who is faithless ...
shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ... witless fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching. A disrespectful and
irreverent mendicant with these five qualities fails, and doesn't
establish themselves in the true teaching.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities doesn't fail,
and establishes themselves in the true teaching. What five? A respectful
and reverent mendicant who is faithful ... conscientious ... prudent ...
energetic ... wise doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true
teaching. A respectful and reverent mendicant with these five qualities
doesn't fail, and establishes themselves in the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.10 Disrespect (2nd)  *Dutiyaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, a disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training. What five? A disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant who is faithless ... shameless ... imprudent ... lazy ...
witless can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this teaching
and training. A disrespectful and irreverent mendicant with these five
qualities can't achieve growth, improvement, or maturity in this
teaching and training.

A respectful and reverent mendicant with five qualities can achieve
growth, improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What
five? A respectful and reverent mendicant who is faithful ...
conscientious ... prudent ... energetic ... wise can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. A respectful
and reverent mendicant with these five qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training."

## The Chapter on Powers

### N 5.11 Not Learned From Anyone Else  *Ananussutasutta*

"I claim to have attained perfection and consummation of insight
regarding principles not learned before from another. The Realized One
has five powers of a Realized One. With these he claims the bull's
place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine
wheel. What five? The powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom. These are the five powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.12 Peak  *Kūṭasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers of a trainee. What five? The
powers of faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the
five powers of a trainee. Of these five powers of a trainee, the power
of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything together.

It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is the chief point, which holds and
binds everything together. In the same way, of these five powers of a
trainee, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds and binds everything
together.

So you should train like this: 'We will have the trainee's powers of
faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.13 In Brief  *Saṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.14 In Detail  *Vitthatasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the power of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the power of faith.

And what is the power of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the power
of energy.

And what is the power of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the power of
mindfulness.

And what is the power of immersion? It's when a noble disciple, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. This is called the power of immersion.

And what is the power of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the power of wisdom.

These are the five powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.15 Should Be Seen  *Daṭṭhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the power of faith be seen? In the four factors of
stream-entry.

And where should the power of energy be seen? In the four right efforts.

And where should the power of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation.

And where should the power of immersion be seen? In the four
absorptions.

And where should the power of wisdom be seen? In the four noble truths.

These are the five powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.16 The Peak, Again  *Punakūṭasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
powers. Of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together. It's like a bungalow. The roof-peak is
the chief point, which holds and binds everything together. In the same
way, of these five powers, the power of wisdom is the chief. It holds
and binds everything together."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.17 One's Own Welfare  *Paṭhamahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for their own
welfare, but not that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant is
personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the
knowledge and vision of freedom. But they don't encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for
their own welfare, but not that of others."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.18 Welfare of Others (2nd)  *Dutiyahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. But they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing for the
welfare of others, but not their own."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.19 The Welfare of Neither  *Tatiyahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing neither for
their own welfare, nor that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, or
the knowledge and vision of freedom. Nor do they encourage others in
these qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing
neither for their own welfare, nor that of others."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.20 The Welfare of Both  *Catutthahitasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is practicing for both
their own welfare and that of others. What five? It's when a mendicant
is personally accomplished in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and
the knowledge and vision of freedom. And they encourage others in these
qualities. A mendicant with these five qualities is practicing both for
their own welfare and that of others."

## The Chapter on Five Factors

### N 5.21 Disrespect (1st)  *Paṭhamaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without
fulfilling ethics, it's impossible to fulfill right view. Without
fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right immersion.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's
possible to fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's
possible to fulfill right immersion."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.22 Disrespect (2nd)  *Dutiyaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill the entire
spectrum of ethics. Without fulfilling the entire spectrum of ethics,
it's impossible to fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion. Without
fulfilling the entire spectrum of immersion, it's impossible to fulfill
the entire spectrum of wisdom.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of ethics. Having
fulfilled the entire spectrum of ethics, it's possible to fulfill the
entire spectrum of immersion. Having fulfilled the entire spectrum of
immersion, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.23 Corruptions  *Upakkilesasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of native gold. When
native gold is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or
radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. What five?
Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver. When native gold is corrupted by
these five corruptions it's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is
brittle and not completely ready for working.

But when native gold is free of these five corruptions it becomes
pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked.
Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they
want, whether a ring, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the
mind is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or radiant. It's
brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending
of defilements. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five
corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it's not
pliable, workable, or radiant. It's brittle, and not rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements.

But when the mind is free of these five corruptions it's pliable,
workable, and radiant. It's not brittle, and is rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements. You become capable
of realizing anything that can be realized by insight to which you
extend the mind, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power---multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful, controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi
as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in
samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' You're
capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' You're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.24 Unethical  *Dussīlasutta*

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. When there is right
immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital
condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge
and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has
fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled
disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.25 Supported  *Anuggahitasutta*

"Mendicants, when right view is supported by five factors it has freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and benefit.

What five? It's when right view is supported by ethics, learning,
discussion, serenity, and discernment. When right view is supported by
these five factors it has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as its
fruit and benefit."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.26 Opportunities for Freedom  *Vimuttāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five opportunities for freedom. If a
mendicant stays diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind
is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. What five?

Firstly, the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches Dhamma
to a mendicant. In whatever way the Teacher or a respected spiritual
companion teaches Dhamma to that mendicant, they always feel inspired by
the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy
springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels
bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi. This is the first opportunity for freedom. If a
mendicant stays diligent, keen, and resolute at this time, their mind is
freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. In
whatever way that mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the
second opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma. But the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. In whatever way that mendicant recites the
teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it, they always feel
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the third opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching. But the
mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart,
examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. In whatever
way that mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their
heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it, they
always feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma.
Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When
the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the fourth opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching ... or
think about it. But a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. In whatever way a mendicant's meditation subject as a basis of
immersion is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and
comprehended with wisdom, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the
fifth opportunity for freedom. ...

These are the five opportunities for freedom. If a mendicant stays
diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind is freed, their
defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.27 Immersion  *Samādhisutta*

"Mendicants, develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you
develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful, five knowledges arise
for you personally. What five?

'This immersion is blissful now, and results in bliss in the future.'
...

'This immersion is noble and not of the flesh.' ...

'This immersion is not cultivated by sinners.' ...

'This immersion is peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not
held in place by forceful suppression.' ...

'I mindfully enter into and emerge from this immersion.' ...

Develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you develop
limitless immersion, alert and mindful, these five knowledges arise for
you personally."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.28 With Five Factors  *Pañcaṅgikasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you how to develop noble right immersion with
five factors. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how do you develop noble right immersion with five factors?

Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
It has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind
and keeping it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. It's
like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. In
the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. This is
the first way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of
cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads
throughout the lake. There's no part of the lake that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of immersion.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss
born of immersion. This is the second way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. It's
like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of
them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture. There's no
part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. This is
the third way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. It's like someone
sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There's no part of
the body that's not spread over with white cloth. In the same way, they
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. This is the fourth
way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is properly
grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom by a
mendicant. It's like when someone views someone else. Someone standing
might view someone sitting, or someone sitting might view someone lying
down. In the same way, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom by a mendicant. This is the fifth way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

When the noble right immersion with five factors is developed and
cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to realize by
insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they
are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is
within range.

Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. If a strong man was to tip it any which way, would
water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to
realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight;
and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one
is within range.

Suppose there was a square, walled lotus pond on level ground, full to
the brim so a crow could drink from it. If a strong man was to open the
wall on any side, would water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to
realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight;
and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one
is within range.

Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad ready. A deft horse trainer, a master
charioteer, might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand
and goad in the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes,
whenever he wishes. In the same way, when noble right immersion with
five factors is developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant
extends the mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be
realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing those things,
since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as far as the
realm of divinity.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every
one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi
as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in
samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' You're
capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives, with features
and details.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one
is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn according to their
deeds.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is
within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.29 Walking Meditation  *Caṅkamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five benefits of walking meditation. What five?
You get fit for traveling, fit for striving in meditation, and healthy.
What's eaten, drunk, chewed, and tasted is properly digested. And
immersion gained while walking lasts long. These are the five benefits
of walking meditation."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.30 With Nāgita  *Nāgitasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Icchānaṅgala. He stayed in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of
Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a
forest near Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods,
Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to others. He
proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to see such
perfected ones."

Then, when the night had passed, they took many fresh and cooked foods
and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood
outside the gates making a dreadful racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's
attendant. Then the Buddha said to Nāgita,
"Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd think it
was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala.
They've brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing
outside the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the
mendicant Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

What you eat, drink, chew, and taste ends up as excrement and urine.
This is its outcome.

When loved ones decay and perish, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress arise. This is its outcome.

When you pursue meditation on the feature of ugliness, revulsion at the
feature of beauty becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing impermanence in the six fields of contact,
revulsion at contact becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping
aggregates, revulsion at grasping becomes stabilized. This is its
outcome."

## The Chapter with Sumanā

### N 5.31 With Sumanā  *Sumanasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Princess
Sumanā, escorted by five hundred chariots and five hundred
royal maidens, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, suppose there were two disciples equal in faith, ethics, and
wisdom. One is a giver, one is not. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. When they have
become gods, would there be any distinction or difference between them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a god, the one who was a giver surpasses the other in five respects:
heavenly lifespan, beauty, happiness, glory, and sovereignty. As a god,
the one who was a giver surpasses the other in these five respects."

"But sir, if they pass away from there and come back to this place as
human beings, would there still be any distinction or difference between
them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a human being, the one who was a giver would surpass the other in
five respects: human lifespan, beauty, happiness, glory, and
sovereignty. As a human being, the one who was a giver surpasses the
other in these five respects."

"But sir, if they both go forth from the lay life to homelessness, would
there still be any distinction or difference between them?"

"There would be, Sumanā," said the Buddha.

"As a renunciate, the one who was a giver surpasses the other in five
respects. They usually use only what they've been invited to
accept---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---rarely using them without invitation. When living with other
spiritual practitioners, they usually find themselves treated agreeably
by them by way of body, speech, and mind, and rarely disagreeably. And
they are usually presented with agreeable things by them, rarely with
disagreeable ones. As a renunciate, the one who was a giver surpasses
the other in these five respects."

"But sir, if they both attain perfection, as perfected ones would there
still be any distinction or difference between them?"

"In that case, I say there is no difference between the freedom of one
and the freedom of the other."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! This is quite enough to justify
giving gifts and making merit. For merit is helpful for those who have
become gods, human beings, and renunciates."

"That's so true, Sumanā. It's quite enough to justify
giving gifts and making merit. For merit is helpful for those who have
become gods, human beings, and renunciates."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "The moon so immaculate,\
> journeying across the dimension of space;\
> outshines with its radiance\
> all the world's stars.
>
> So too, a faithful individual,\
> perfect in ethics,\
> outshines with their generosity\
> all the world's stingy people.
>
> The thundering rain cloud,\
> its hundred peaks wreathed in lightning,\
> pours down over the rich earth,\
> soaking the uplands and valleys.
>
> Even so, an astute person accomplished in vision,\
> a disciple of the fully awakened Buddha,\
> surpasses a stingy person\
> in five respects:
>
> long life and fame,\
> beauty and happiness.\
> Lavished with riches,\
> they depart to rejoice in heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.32 With Cundī  *Cundīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Princess
Cundī, escorted by five hundred chariots and five hundred
royal maidens, went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, my brother, Prince Cunda, says this: 'Take a woman or man who goes
for refuge to the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and
doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Only then do they get reborn
in a good place, not a bad place, when their body breaks up, after
death.' And so I ask the Buddha: Sir, what kind of teacher should you
have confidence in so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad place,
when the body breaks up, after death? Sir, what kind of teaching should
you have confidence in so as to be reborn in a good place, not a bad
place, when the body breaks up, after death? Sir, what kind of
Saṅgha should you have confidence in so as to be reborn in
a good place, not a bad place, when the body breaks up, after death?
Sir, what kind of ethics should you fulfill so as to be reborn in a good
place, not a bad place, when the body breaks up, after death?"

"Cundī, the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, is said to be the best of all sentient beings---be they
footless, with two feet, four feet, or many feet; with form or formless;
with perception or without perception or with neither perception nor
non-perception. Those who have confidence in the Buddha have confidence
in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The noble eightfold path is said to be the best of all conditioned
things. Those who have confidence in the noble eightfold path have
confidence in the best. Having confidence in the best, the result is the
best.

Fading away is said to be the best of all things whether conditioned or
unconditioned. That is, the quelling of vanity, the removing of thirst,
the uprooting of clinging, the breaking of the round, the ending of
craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. Those who have
confidence in the teaching of fading away have confidence in the best.
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The Saṅgha of the Realized One's disciples is said to be
the best of all communities and groups. It consists of the four pairs,
the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the Buddha's
disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world. Those who
have confidence in the Saṅgha have confidence in the best.
Having confidence in the best, the result is the best.

The ethical conduct loved by the noble ones is said to be the best of
all ethics. It is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred,
liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion. Those who fulfill the ethics loved by the noble ones fulfill
the best. Fulfilling the best, the result is the best.

> For those who, knowing the best teaching,\
> base their confidence on the best---\
> confident in the best Awakened One,\
> supremely worthy of a religious donation;
>
> confident in the best teaching,\
> the bliss of fading and stilling;\
> confident in the best Saṅgha,\
> the supreme field of merit---
>
> giving gifts to the best,\
> the best of merit grows:\
> the best lifespan, beauty,\
> fame, reputation, happiness, and strength.
>
> An intelligent person gives to the best,\
> settled on the best teaching.\
> When they become a god or human,\
> they rejoice at reaching the best."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.33 With Uggaha  *Uggahasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Bhaddiya, in Jātiyā
Wood.

Then Uggaha, Meṇḍaka's grandson, went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha
please accept tomorrow's meal from me, together with three other monks."
The Buddha consented with silence. Then, knowing that the Buddha had
consented, Uggaha got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then when the night had passed, the Buddha robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went to Uggaha's home, where he sat on the
seat spread out. Then Uggaha served and satisfied the Buddha with his
own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When the Buddha had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, Uggaha sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, these girls of mine will be going to
their husbands' families. May the Buddha please advise and instruct
them. It will be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

Then the Buddha said to those girls:

"So, girls, you should train like this: 'Our parents will give us to a
husband wanting what's best, out of kindness and sympathy. We will get
up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging, behaving nicely
and speaking politely.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'Those our husband
respects---mother and father, ascetics and brahmins---we will honor,
respect, revere, and venerate, and serve with a seat and a drink when
they come as guests.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will be deft and tireless in
doing domestic duties for our husband, such as knitting and sewing. We
will have an understanding of how to go about things in order to
complete and organize the work.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will know what work our
husband's domestic bondservants, servants, and workers have completed,
and what they've left incomplete. We will know who is sick, and who is
fit or unwell. We will distribute to each a fair portion of fresh and
cooked foods.' That's how you should train.

So, girls, you should train like this: 'We will ensure that any income
our husbands earn is guarded and protected, whether money, grain,
silver, or gold. We will not overspend, steal, waste, or lose it.'
That's how you should train. When they have these five qualities,
females---when their body breaks up, after death---are reborn in company
with the Gods of the Agreeable Host.

> She'd never look down on her husband,\
> who's always eager to work hard,\
> always looking after her,\
> and bringing whatever she wants.
>
> And a good woman never scolds her husband\
> with jealous words.\
> Being astute, she reveres\
> those respected by her husband.
>
> She gets up early, works tirelessly,\
> and manages the domestic help.\
> She's agreeable to her husband,\
> and preserves his wealth.
>
> A lady who fulfills these duties\
> according to her husband's desire,\
> is reborn among the gods\
> called 'Agreeable'."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.34 With General Sīha  *Sīhasenāpatisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then General Sīha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and asked him, "Sir, can you point out a fruit of giving
that's apparent in the present life?"

"I can, Sīha," said the Buddha.

"A giver, a donor is dear and beloved to many people. This is a fruit of
giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, good and true persons associate with a giver. This is
another fruit of giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, a giver gains a good reputation. This is another fruit of
giving that's apparent in the present life.

Furthermore, a giver enters any kind of assembly bold and assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is another fruit of giving that's apparent in the present
life.

Furthermore, when a giver's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is a fruit of giving to do with
lives to come."

When he said this, General Sīha said to the Buddha, "When
it comes to those four fruits of giving that are apparent in the present
life, I don't have to rely on faith in the Buddha, for I know them too.
I'm a giver, a donor, and am dear and beloved to many people. I'm a
giver, and good and true persons associate with me. I'm a giver, and I
have this good reputation: 'General Sīha gives, serves, and
attends on the Saṅgha.' I'm a giver, and I enter any kind
of assembly bold and assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats,
brahmins, householders, or ascetics. When it comes to these four fruits
of giving that are apparent in the present life, I don't have to rely on
faith in the Buddha, for I know them too. But when the Buddha says:
'When a giver's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm.' I don't know this, so I have to rely on faith
in the Buddha."

"That's so true, Sīha! That's so true! When a giver's body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.

> Giving, you're loved and befriended by many people.\
> You get a good reputation, and your fame grows.\
> A generous man enters an assembly\
> bold and assured.
>
> So an astute person, seeking happiness,\
> \>would give gifts,\
> having driven out the stain of stinginess.\
> They live long in the heaven of the Three and Thirty,\
> enjoying the company of the gods.
>
> Having taken the opportunity to do good,\
> \>when they pass from here\
> they wander radiant in the Garden of Delight.\
> There they delight, rejoice, and enjoy themselves,\
> provided with the five kinds of sensual stimulation.\
> Having practiced the word of the unattached, the unaffected,\
> disciples of the Holy One rejoice in heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.35 The Benefits of Giving  *Dānānisaṁsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five benefits of giving. What five? A giver, a
donor is dear and beloved by many people. Good and true persons
associate with them. They get a good reputation. They don't neglect a
layperson's duties. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five benefits of
giving.

> Giving, one is loved,\
> and follows the way of the good.\
> The good, disciplined spiritual practitioners\
> always associate with you.
>
> They teach you the Dhamma\
> that dispels all suffering.\
> Having understood this teaching,\
> the undefiled one is fully extinguished."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.36 Timely Gifts  *Kāladānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five timely gifts. What five? A gift to a
visitor. A gift to someone setting out on a journey. A gift to someone
who is sick. A gift at a time of famine. Presenting the freshly
harvested grains and fruits first to those who are ethical. These are
the five timely gifts.

> The wise give at the right time,\
> being bountiful and rid of stinginess.\
> A religious donation at the right time\
> to the noble ones, sincere and unaffected,
>
> given with a clear and confident mind,\
> is indeed abundant.\
> Those who rejoice at that,\
> or do other services,\
> don't miss out on the offering;\
> they too have a share in the merit.
>
> So you should give without holding back,\
> where a gift is very fruitful.\
> The good deeds of sentient beings\
> support them in the next world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.37 Food  *Bhojanasutta*

"Mendicants, when a giver gives food, they give the recipients five
things. What five? Long life, beauty, happiness, strength, and
eloquence.

Giving long life, they have long life as a god or human.

Giving beauty, they have beauty as a god or human.

Giving happiness, they have happiness as a god or human.

Giving strength, they have strength as a god or human.

Giving eloquence, they are eloquent as a god or human.

When a giver gives food, they give the recipients five things.

> Being attentive, one is a giver of life, strength,\
> beauty, and eloquence.\
> An intelligent giver of happiness\
> gains happiness in return.
>
> Giving life, strength, beauty,\
> happiness, and eloquence,\
> they're long-lived and famous\
> wherever they're reborn."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.38 Faith  *Saddhasutta*

"Mendicants, a faithful gentleman gets five benefits. What five? The
true persons in the world show sympathy first to the faithful, not so
much to the unfaithful. They first approach the faithful, not so much
the unfaithful. They first receive alms from the faithful, not so much
the unfaithful. They first teach Dhamma to the faithful, not so much the
unfaithful. When their body breaks up, after death, the faithful are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. A faithful gentleman gets
these five benefits.

Suppose there was a great banyan tree at a level crossroads. It would
become a refuge for birds from all around. In the same way, a faithful
gentleman becomes a refuge for many people---monks, nuns, laywomen, and
laymen.

> With its branches, leaves, and fruit,\
> a great tree with its strong trunk,\
> firmly-rooted and fruit-bearing,\
> supports many birds.
>
> It's a lovely place,\
> frequented by the sky-soarers.\
> Those that need shade go in the shade,\
> those that need fruit enjoy the fruit.
>
> So too, a faithful individual\
> is perfect in ethics,\
> humble and amenable,\
> sweet, courteous, and tender.
>
> Those free of greed, freed of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled,\
> fields of merit for the world,\
> associate with such a person.
>
> They teach them the Dhamma,\
> that dispels all suffering.\
> Having understood this teaching,\
> the undefiled one is fully extinguished."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.39 A Child  *Puttasutta*

"Mendicants, parents see five reasons to wish for the birth of a child
in the family. What five? Since we looked after them, they'll look after
us. They'll do their duty for us. The family traditions will last.
They'll take care of the inheritance. Or else when we have passed away
they'll give an offering on our behalf. Parents see these five reasons
to wish for the birth of a child in the family.

> Seeing five reasons,\
> astute people wish for a child.\
> Since we looked after them, they'll look after us.\
> They'll do their duty for us.
>
> The family traditions will last.\
> They'll take care of the inheritance.\
> Or else when we have passed away\
> they'll give an offering on our behalf.
>
> Seeing these five reasons\
> astute people wish for a child.\
> And so true persons,\
> grateful and thankful,
>
> look after their parents,\
> remembering past deeds.\
> They do for their parents,\
> as their parents did for them in the past.
>
> Following their advice,\
> \>looking after those who raised them,\
> the family traditions are not lost.\
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> such a child is praiseworthy."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.40 Great Sal Trees  *Mahāsālaputtasutta*

"Mendicants, great sal trees grow in five ways supported by the
Himalayas, the king of mountains. What five? The branches, leaves, and
foliage; the bark; the shoots; the softwood; and the hardwood. Great sal
trees grow in these five ways supported by the Himalayas, the king of
mountains.

In the same way, a family grows in five ways supported by a family head
with faith. What five? Faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.
A family grows in these five ways supported by a family head with faith.

> Supported by the mountain crags\
> in the wilds, the formidable forest,\
> the tree grows\
> to become lord of the forest.
>
> So too, when the family head\
> is ethical and faithful,\
> supported by them, they grow:\
> children, partners, and kin,\
> colleagues, relatives,\
> and those dependent for their livelihood.
>
> Seeing the ethical conduct of the virtuous,\
> the generosity and good deeds,\
> those who see clearly\
> do likewise.
>
> Having practiced the teaching here,\
> the path that goes to a good place,\
> they delight in the heavenly realm,\
> enjoying all the pleasures they desire."

## The Chapter with King Muṇḍa

### N 5.41 Getting Rich  *Ādiyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, there are these five reasons to get rich. What five?

Firstly, with his legitimate wealth---earned by his efforts and
initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the
brow---a noble disciple makes himself happy and pleased, keeping himself
properly happy. He makes his mother and father happy ... He makes his
children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff happy ... This is
the first reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes his friends and
colleagues happy ... This is the second reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he protects himself against
losses from such things as fire, water, kings, bandits, or unloved
heirs. He keeps himself safe. This is the third reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he makes five spirit-offerings:
to relatives, guests, ancestors, king, and deities. This is the fourth
reason to get rich.

Furthermore, with his legitimate wealth he establishes an uplifting
religious donation for ascetics and brahmins---those who refrain from
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves---that's conducive to heaven,
ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven. This is the fifth reason to
get rich.

These are the five reasons to get rich.

Now if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons run out,
he thinks: 'So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are running
out.' And so he has no regrets.

But if the riches a noble disciple gets for these five reasons increase,
he thinks: 'So, the riches I have obtained for these reasons are
increasing.' And so he has no regrets in both cases.

> 'I've enjoyed my wealth,\
> \>supporting those who depend on me;\
> I've overcome losses;\
> I've given uplifting religious donations;\
> and made the five spirit-offerings.\
> I have looked after the ethical and\
> disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> I've achieved the purpose\
> for which an astute lay person\
> wishes to gain wealth.\
> I don't regret what I've done.'
>
> A mortal person who recollects this\
> stands firm in the teaching of the noble ones.\
> They're praised in this life by the astute,\
> and they depart to rejoice in heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.42 A True Person  *Sappurisasutta*

"Mendicants, a true person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of the people. For the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
mother and father; children and partners; bondservants, workers, and
staff; friends and colleagues; and ascetics and brahmins.

It's like a great rain cloud, which nourishes all the crops for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of the people. In the same way, a true
person is born in a family for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of
the people. ...

> The gods protect one who is guarded by principle,\
> who uses their wealth for the welfare of the many.\
> One who is learned,\
> \>with precepts and observances intact,\
> and steady in principle, doesn't lose their reputation.
>
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious;\
> like a pendant of Black Plum River gold,\
> who is worthy to criticize them?\
> Even the gods praise them,\
> and by the Divinity, too, they're praised."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.43 Likable  *Iṭṭhasutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, these five things, which are likable, desirable, and
agreeable are hard to get in the world. What five? Long life, beauty,
happiness, fame, and heaven. These are the five things, which are
likable, desirable, and agreeable, but hard to get in the world.

And I say that these five things are not got by praying or wishing for
them. If they were, who would lack them?

A noble disciple who wants to live long ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to long life. For by practicing that way they gain long life as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be beautiful ought not pray for it, or
hope for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that
leads to beauty. For by practicing that way they gain beauty as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be happy ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to happiness. For by practicing that way they gain happiness as a god or
a human being.

A noble disciple who wants to be famous ought not pray for it, or hope
for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that leads
to fame. For by practicing that way they gain fame as a god or a human
being.

A noble disciple who wants to go to heaven ought not pray for it, or
hope for it, or pine for it. Instead, they should practice the way that
leads to heaven. For by practicing that way they gain heaven, they are
one who gains the heavens.

> For one who desires a continuous flow\
> of exceptional delights---\
> long life, beauty, fame and reputation,\
> heaven, and birth in an eminent family---
>
> the astute praise diligence\
> in making merit.\
> Being diligent, an astute person\
> secures both benefits:
>
> the benefit in this life,\
> and in lives to come.\
> An attentive one, comprehending the meaning,\
> is called 'astute'."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.44 Agreeable  *Manāpadāyīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then the Buddha robed up
in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home of the
householder Ugga of Vesālī, where he sat on the seat spread
out.

Then Ugga went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha: 'The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable.' My sal flower
porridge is agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from me out of
sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"Sir, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha: 'The
giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable.' My pork with jujube is
agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from me out of sympathy." So
the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"... My fried vegetable stalks are agreeable: may the Buddha please
accept them from me out of sympathy." So the Buddha accepted them out of
sympathy.

"... My boiled fine rice with the dark grains picked out, served with
many soups and sauces is agreeable: may the Buddha please accept it from
me out of sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

"... My cloths imported from Kāsi are agreeable: may the
Buddha please accept them from me out of sympathy." So the Buddha
accepted them out of sympathy.

"... My couch spread with woolen covers---shag-piled or embroidered with
flowers---and spread with a fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
pillows at both ends is agreeable. But, sir, I know that this is not
proper for the Buddha. However, this plank of sandalwood is worth over a
thousand dollars. May the Buddha please accept it from me out of
sympathy." So the Buddha accepted it out of sympathy.

And then the Buddha rejoiced with Ugga with these verses of
appreciation:

> "The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable,\
> enthusiastically giving clothing, bedding,\
> food and drink, and various requisites\
> to those of sincere conduct.
>
> Knowing the perfected ones to be like a field\
> for what's given, offered and not held back,\
> a true person gives what's hard to give:\
> the giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable."

And then the Buddha, having rejoiced with Ugga with these verses of
appreciation, got up from his seat and left.

Then after some time Ugga passed away, and was reborn in a host of
mind-made gods. At that time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.

Then, late at night, the glorious god Ugga, lighting up the entire
Jeta's Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side. The
Buddha said to him, "Ugga, I trust it is all you wished?"

"Sir, it is indeed just as I wished." Then the Buddha addressed Ugga in
verse:

> "The giver of the agreeable gets the agreeable,\
> the giver of the foremost gets the foremost,\
> the giver of the excellent gets the excellent,\
> the giver of the best gets the best.
>
> A person who gives the foremost,\
> the excellent, the best:\
> they're long-lived and famous\
> wherever they're reborn."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.45 Overflowing Merit  *Puññābhisandasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of overflowing merit,
overflowing goodness. They nurture happiness and are conducive to
heaven, ripening in happiness and leading to heaven. They lead to what
is likable, desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

What five? When a mendicant enters and remains in a limitless immersion
of heart while using a robe ... almsfood ... lodging ... bed and chair
... medicines and supplies for the sick, the overflowing of merit for
the donor is limitless ...

These are the five kinds of overflowing merit, overflowing goodness.
They nurture happiness, and are conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness, and leading to heaven. They lead to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness.

When a noble disciple has these five kinds of overflowing merit and
goodness, it's not easy to grasp how much merit they have by saying that
this is the extent of their overflowing merit ... that leads to
happiness. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great
mass of merit.

It's like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It's not easy
to say: 'This is how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands,
hundreds of thousands of gallons there are.' It's simply reckoned as an
incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of water.

In the same way, when a noble disciple has these five kinds of
overflowing merit and goodness, it's not easy to grasp how much merit
they have: 'This is how much this overflowing merit ... leads to
happiness.' It's simply reckoned as an incalculable, immeasurable, great
mass of merit.

> Hosts of people use the rivers,\
> and though the rivers are many,\
> all reach the great deep, the boundless ocean,\
> the cruel sea that's home to precious gems.
>
> So too, when a person gives food, drink, and clothes;\
> and they're a giver of beds, seats, and mats---\
> the streams of merit reach that astute person,\
> as the rivers bring their waters to the sea."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.46 Success  *Sampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. These are the five
accomplishments."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.47 Wealth  *Dhanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of wealth. What five? The wealth
of faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom.

And what is the wealth of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the wealth of faith.

And what is the wealth of ethics? It's when a noble disciple doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. This is called the wealth of ethics.

And what is the wealth of learning? It's when a noble disciple is very
learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned. These teachings
are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's
totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is called the wealth of learning.

And what is the wealth of generosity? It's when a noble disciple lives
at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called the wealth of generosity.

And what is the wealth of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the wealth of wisdom.

These are the five kinds of wealth.

> Whoever has faith in the Realized One,\
> unwavering and well grounded;\
> whose ethical conduct is good,\
> praised and loved by the noble ones;
>
> who has confidence in the Saṅgha,\
> and correct view:\
> they're said to be prosperous,\
> their life is not in vain.
>
> So let the wise devote themselves\
> to faith, ethical behavior,\
> confidence, and insight into the teaching,\
> remembering the instructions of the Buddhas."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.48 Things That Cannot Be Had  *Alabbhanīyaṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world. What five? That someone liable to old age should not grow old.
That someone liable to sickness should not get sick. ... That someone
liable to death should not die. ... That someone liable to ending should
not end. ... That someone liable to perishing should not perish. ...

An unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to old age who grows
old. But they don't reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has
someone liable to old age who grows old. For as long as sentient beings
come and go, pass away and are reborn, they all have someone liable to
old age who grows old. If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating
my breast and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old
age grows old, I'd lose my appetite and my physical appearance would
deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged,
and my friends would be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old
age grows old, they sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and
falling into confusion. This is called an unlearned ordinary person
struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves.

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to sickness
... death ... ending ... perishing. But they don't reflect on perishing:
'It's not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For
as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn, they
all have someone liable to perishing who perishes. If I were to sorrow
and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just
because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose my appetite and
my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is called
an unlearned ordinary person struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only
mortifies themselves.

A learned noble disciple has someone liable to old age who grows old. So
they reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has someone liable to old
age who grows old. For as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away
and are reborn, they all have someone liable to old age who grows old.
If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling
into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows old, I'd
lose my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out
sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only
mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

Furthermore, a learned noble disciple has someone liable to sickness ...
death ... ending ... perishing. So they reflect on perishing: 'It's not
just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For as long as
sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn, they all have
someone liable to perishing who perishes. If I were to sorrow and wail
and lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because
someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose my appetite and my
physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they don't sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This
is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out sorrow's poisoned
arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only mortify
themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

These are the five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

> Sorrowing and lamenting\
> doesn't do even a little bit of good.\
> When they know that you're sad,\
> your enemies are encouraged.
>
> When an astute person doesn't waver\
> \>in the face of adversity,\
> as they're able to evaluate what's beneficial,\
> their enemies suffer,\
> seeing that their normal expression doesn't change.
>
> Chants, recitations, fine sayings,\
> charity or traditions:\
> if by means of any such things you benefit,\
> then by all means keep doing them.
>
> But if you understand that 'this good thing\
> can't be had by me or by anyone else',\
> you should accept it without sorrowing, thinking:\
> 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.49 The King of Kosala  *Kosalasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then King Pasenadi of
Kosala went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side.

Then a man went up to the king and whispered in his ear, "Your Majesty,
Queen Mallikā has passed away."

When this was said, King Pasenadi was miserable and sad. He sat with his
shoulders drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say.

Knowing this, the Buddha said to him, "Great king, there are five things
that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra
or divinity or by anyone in the world. What five? That someone liable to
old age should not grow old. ... Sorrowing and lamenting doesn't do even
a little bit of good ... 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.50 With Nārada  *Nāradasutta*

At one time Venerable Nārada was staying near
Pāṭaliputta, in the Chicken Monastery.

Now at that time King Muṇḍa's dear and beloved Queen
Bhaddā had just passed away. And since that time, the king
did not bathe, anoint himself, eat his meals, or apply himself to his
work. Day and night he brooded over Queen Bhaddā's corpse.

Then King Muṇḍa addressed Piyaka, the keeper of the
treasury,

"So, my good Piyaka, please place Queen Bhaddā's corpse in
an iron case filled with oil. Then close it up with another case, so
that we can view Queen Bhaddā's body even longer."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka, and he did as the king instructed.

Then it occurred to Piyaka, "King Muṇḍa's dear and beloved
Queen Bhaddā has passed away. Since then the king does not
bathe, anoint himself, eat his meals, or apply himself to his work. Day
and night he broods over Queen Bhaddā's corpse. Now, what
ascetic or brahmin might the king pay homage to, whose teaching could
help the king give up sorrow's arrow?"

Then it occurred to Piyaka, "This Venerable Nārada is
staying in the Chicken Monastery at Pāṭaliputta. He has
this good reputation: 'He is astute, competent, intelligent, learned, a
brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature, a perfected one.' What if King
Muṇḍa was to pay homage to Venerable Nārada?
Hopefully when he hears Nārada's teaching, the king could
give up sorrow's arrow."

Then Piyaka went to the king and said to him, "Sire, this Venerable
Nārada is staying in the Chicken Monastery at
Pāṭaliputta. He has this good reputation: 'He is astute,
competent, intelligent, learned, a brilliant speaker, eloquent, mature,
a perfected one.' What if Your Majesty was to pay homage to Venerable
Nārada? Hopefully when you hear Nārada's
teaching, you could give up sorrow's arrow."

"Well then, my good Piyaka, let Nārada know. For how could
one such as I presume to visit an ascetic or brahmin in my realm without
first letting them know?"

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka. He went to Nārada,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, King
Muṇḍa's dear and beloved Queen Bhaddā has
passed away. And since she passed away, the king has not bathed,
anointed himself, eaten his meals, or got his business done. Day and
night he broods over Queen Bhaddā's corpse. Sir, please
teach the king so that, when he hears your teaching, he can give up
sorrow's arrow."

"Please, Piyaka, let the king come when he likes."

Then Piyaka got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
Venerable Nārada, keeping him on his right, before going to
the king and saying, "Sire, the request for an audience with Venerable
Nārada has been granted. Please, Your Majesty, go at your
convenience."

"Well then, my good Piyaka, harness the finest chariots."

"Yes, Your Majesty," replied Piyaka. He did so, then told the king:

"Sire, the finest chariots are harnessed. Please, Your Majesty, go at
your convenience."

Then King Muṇḍa mounted a fine carriage and, along with
other fine carriages, set out in full royal pomp to see Venerable
Nārada at the Chicken Monastery. He went by carriage as far
as the terrain allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on
foot. Then the king went up to Nārada, bowed, and sat down
to one side. Then Nārada said to him:

"Great king, there are five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world. What five? That someone liable to old age should not grow old.
... That someone liable to sickness should not get sick. ... That
someone liable to death should not die. ... That someone liable to
ending should not end. ... That someone liable to perishing should not
perish. ...

An unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to old age who grows
old. But they don't reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has
someone liable to old age who grows old. For all sentient beings have
someone liable to old age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come
and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were to sorrow and wail and
lament, beating my breast and falling into confusion, just because
someone liable to old age grows old, I'd lose my appetite and my
physical appearance would deteriorate. My work wouldn't get done, my
enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would be dispirited.' And
so, when someone liable to old age grows old, they sorrow and wail and
lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion. This is called
an unlearned ordinary person struck by sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only
mortifies themselves.

Furthermore, an unlearned ordinary person has someone liable to sickness
... death ... ending ... perishing. But they don't reflect on perishing:
'It's not just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For
all sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as
long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were
to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into
confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose
my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called an unlearned ordinary person struck by
sorrow's poisoned arrow, who only mortifies themselves.

A learned noble disciple has someone liable to old age who grows old. So
they reflect on old age: 'It's not just me who has someone liable to old
age who grows old. For all sentient beings have someone liable to old
age who grows old, as long as sentient beings come and go, pass away and
are reborn. If I were to sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast
and falling into confusion, just because someone liable to old age grows
old, I'd lose my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate.
My work wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my
friends would be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to old age
grows old, they don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast
and falling into confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who
has drawn out sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned
ordinary people only mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns,
that noble disciple only extinguishes themselves.

Furthermore, a learned noble disciple has someone liable to sickness ...
death ... ending ... perishing. So they reflect on perishing: 'It's not
just me who has someone liable to perishing who perishes. For all
sentient beings have someone liable to perishing who perishes, as long
as sentient beings come and go, pass away and are reborn. If I were to
sorrow and wail and lament, beating my breast and falling into
confusion, just because someone liable to perishing perishes, I'd lose
my appetite and my physical appearance would deteriorate. My work
wouldn't get done, my enemies would be encouraged, and my friends would
be dispirited.' And so, when someone liable to perishing perishes, they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion. This is called a learned noble disciple who has drawn out
sorrow's poisoned arrow, struck by which unlearned ordinary people only
mortify themselves. Sorrowless, free of thorns, that noble disciple only
extinguishes themselves.

These are the five things that cannot be had by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world.

> Sorrowing and lamenting\
> doesn't do even a little bit of good.\
> When they know that you're sad,\
> your enemies are encouraged.
>
> When an astute person doesn't waver\
> \>in the face of adversity,\
> as they're able to evaluate what's beneficial,\
> their enemies suffer,\
> seeing that their normal expression doesn't change.
>
> Chants, recitations, fine sayings,\
> charity or traditions:\
> if by means of any such things you benefit,\
> then by all means keep doing them.
>
> But if you understand that 'this good thing\
> can't be had by me or by anyone else',\
> you should accept it without sorrowing, thinking:\
> 'The deed is powerful. What can I do now?'"

When he said this, King Muṇḍa said to Venerable
Nārada, "Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the
teaching?"

"Great king, this exposition of the teaching is called 'Pulling Out
Sorrow's Arrow'."

"Indeed, sir, this is the pulling out of sorrow's arrow! Hearing this
exposition of the teaching, I've given up sorrow's arrow."

Then King Muṇḍa addressed Piyaka, the keeper of the
treasury, "Well then, my good Piyaka, cremate Queen
Bhaddā's corpse and build a monument. From this day forth,
I will bathe, anoint myself, eat my meals, and apply myself to my work."


## The Chapter on Hindrances

### N 5.51 Obstacles  *Āvaraṇasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of
the mind that weaken wisdom. What five? Sensual desire ... Ill will ...
Dullness and drowsiness ... Restlessness and remorse ... Doubt ... These
are the five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken
wisdom.

Take a mendicant who has feeble and weak wisdom, not having given up
these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken
wisdom. It is quite impossible that they would know what's for their own
good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would
realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones.

Suppose there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly, going far,
carrying all before it. But then a man would open channels on both
sides, so the mid-river current would be dispersed, displaced, and
separated. The river would no longer flow swiftly, going far, carrying
all before it.

In the same way, take a mendicant who has feeble and weak wisdom, not
having given up these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the
mind that weaken wisdom. It is not possible that they would know what's
for their own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that
they would realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones.

Take a mendicant who has powerful wisdom, having given up these five
obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that weaken wisdom. It's
quite possible that they would know what's for their own good, the good
of another, or the good of both; or that they would realize any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

Suppose there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly, going far,
carrying all before it. But then a man would close up the channels on
both sides, so the mid-river current would not be dispersed, displaced,
and separated. The river would keep flowing swiftly for a long way,
carrying all before it.

In the same way, take a mendicant who has powerful wisdom, having given
up these five obstacles and hindrances, parasites of the mind that
weaken wisdom. It's quite possible that they would know what's for their
own good, the good of another, or the good of both; or that they would
realize any superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.52 A Heap of the Unskillful  *Akusalarāsisutta*

"Mendicants, rightly speaking, you'd call the five hindrances a 'heap of
the unskillful'. For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the
unskillful. What five? The hindrances of sensual desire, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Rightly
speaking, you'd call these five hindrances a 'heap of the unskillful'.
For these five hindrances are entirely a heap of the unskillful."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.53 Factors That Support Meditation  *Padhāniyaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five factors that support meditation. What
five?

It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

They're not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the
Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

These are the five factors that support meditation."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.54 Times Good for Meditation  *Samayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five times that are not good for meditation. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant is old, overcome with old age. This is the first
time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, a mendicant is sick, overcome by sickness. This is the
second time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's a famine, a bad harvest, so it's hard to get
almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting alms. This is the
third time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the
countryfolk mount their vehicles and flee everywhere. This is the fourth
time that's not good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's a schism in the Saṅgha. When the
Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and forsake
each other. This doesn't inspire confidence in those without it, and it
causes some with confidence to change their minds. This is the fifth
time that's not good for meditation.

These are the five times that are not good for meditation.

There are five times that are good for meditation. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant is a youth, young, with pristine black hair,
blessed with youth, in the prime of life. This is the first time that's
good for meditation.

Furthermore, they are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well,
being neither too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for
meditation. This is the second time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, there's plenty of food, a good harvest, so it's easy to get
almsfood, and easy to keep going by collecting alms. This is the third
time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, people live in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, blending like milk and water, and regarding each other with
kindly eyes. This is the fourth time that's good for meditation.

Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, with one recitation. When
the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don't abuse, insult, block,
or forsake each other. This inspires confidence in those without it, and
increases confidence in those who have it. This is the fifth time that's
good for meditation.

These are the five times that are good for meditation."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.55 Mother and Son  *Mātāputtasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now, at that time a mother and son had both entered the rainy season
residence at Sāvatthī, as a monk and a nun. They wanted to
see each other often. The mother wanted to see her son often, and the
son his mother. Seeing each other often, they became close. Being so
close, they became intimate. And being intimate, lust overcame them.
With their minds swamped by lust, without resigning the training and
declaring their inability to continue, they had sex.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, how could that futile man imagine that a mother cannot lust
for her son, or that a son cannot lust for his mother? Compared to the
sight of a woman, I do not see a single sight that is so arousing,
sensuous, intoxicating, captivating, and infatuating, and such an
obstacle to reaching the supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Sentient
beings are lustful, greedy, tied, infatuated, and attached to the sight
of a woman. They sorrow for a long time under the sway of a woman's
sight.

Compared to the sound ... smell ... taste ... touch of a woman, I do not
see a single touch that is so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating,
captivating, and infatuating, and such an obstacle to reaching the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke. Sentient beings are lustful, greedy,
tied, infatuated, and attached to the touch of a woman. They sorrow for
a long time under the sway of a woman's touch.

When a woman walks, she occupies a man's mind. When a woman stands ...
sits ... lies down ... laughs ... speaks ... sings ... cries ... is
injured, she occupies a man's mind. Even when a woman is dead, she
occupies a man's mind. For if anyone should be rightly called 'an
all-round snare of Māra', it's females.

> You might chat with someone who has knife in hand.\
> You might even chat with a goblin.\
> You might sit close by a viper,\
> whose bite would take your life.\
> But never should you chat\
> one on one with a female.
>
> They captivate the unmindful\
> with a glance and a smile.\
> Or scantily clad,\
> they speak charming words.\
> It's not good to sit with such a person,\
> even if she's injured or dead.
>
> These five kinds of sensual stimulation\
> are apparent in a woman's body:\
> sights, sounds, tastes, smells,\
> and touches so delightful.
>
> Those swept away by the flood of sensual pleasures,\
> not comprehending them,\
> are governed by transmigration---\
> time and destination, and life after life.
>
> But those who fully understand sensual pleasures\
> live fearing nothing from any quarter.\
> They are those in the world who've crossed over,\
> having reached the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.56 Mentor  *Upajjhāyasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to his own mentor, and said, "Now, sir, my body
feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, the teachings don't spring
to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill my mind. I lead the spiritual
life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings."

Then that mendicant took his protégé to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him, "Sir, this mendicant says this: 'Now, sir, my
body feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, the teachings don't
spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill my mind. I lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings.'"

"That's how it is, mendicant, when your sense doors are unguarded, you
eat too much, you're not dedicated to wakefulness, you're unable to
discern skillful qualities, and you don't pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Your
body feels like it's drugged. You're disorientated, the teachings don't
spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill your mind. You lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the teachings.

So you should train like this: 'I will guard my sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

When that mendicant had been given this advice by the Buddha, he got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

When that mendicant had attained perfection, he went up to his own
mentor, and said, "Now, sir, my body doesn't feel like it's drugged. I'm
not disorientated, the teachings spring to mind, and dullness and
drowsiness don't fill my mind. I lead the spiritual life satisfied, and
have no doubts about the teachings."

Then that mendicant took his protégé to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him, "Sir, this mendicant says this: 'Now, sir, my
body doesn't feel like it's drugged. I'm not disorientated, the
teachings spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness don't fill my
mind. I lead the spiritual life satisfied, and have no doubts about the
teachings.'"

"That's how it is, mendicant, when your sense doors are guarded, you're
moderate in eating, you're dedicated to wakefulness, you're able to
discern skillful qualities, and you pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Your
body doesn't feel like it's drugged. You're not disorientated, the
teachings spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness don't fill your
mind. You lead the spiritual life satisfied, and have no doubts about
the teachings.

So you should train like this: 'We will guard our sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.57 Subjects for Regular Reviewing  *Abhiṇhapaccavekkhitabbaṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, a woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate should often
review these five subjects. What five?

'I am liable to grow old, I am not exempt from old age.' A woman or a
man, a layperson or a renunciate should often review this.

'I am liable to get sick, I am not exempt from sickness.' ...

'I am liable to die, I am not exempt from death.' ...

'I must be parted and separated from all I hold dear and beloved.' ...

'I am the owner of my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my
relative, and my refuge.

I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do, whether good or bad.' A
woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate should often review this.

What is the advantage for a woman or a man, a layperson or a renunciate
of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to grow old, I am not exempt from
old age'? There are sentient beings who, intoxicated with the vanity of
youth, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. Reviewing this
subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of youth, or at least
reduce it. This is the advantage for a woman or a man, a layperson or a
renunciate of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to grow old, I am not
exempt from old age'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to get sick,
I am not exempt from sickness'? There are sentient beings who, drunk on
the vanity of health, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind.
Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of
health, or at least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing
this: 'I am liable to get sick, I am not exempt from sickness'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I am liable to die, I am
not exempt from death'? There are sentient beings who, drunk on the
vanity of life, do bad things by way of body, speech, and mind.
Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up the vanity of life,
or at least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I
am liable to die, I am not exempt from death'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I must be parted and
separated from all I hold dear and beloved'? There are sentient beings
who, aroused by desire and lust for their dear and beloved, do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. Reviewing this subject often,
they entirely give up desire and lust for their dear and beloved, or at
least reduce it. This is the advantage of often reviewing this: 'I must
be parted and separated from all I hold dear and beloved'.

What is the advantage of often reviewing like this: 'I am the owner of
my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my relative, and my
refuge. I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do, whether good or
bad'? There are sentient beings who do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. Reviewing this subject often, they entirely give up
bad conduct, or at least reduce it. This is the advantage for a woman or
a man, a layperson or a renunciate of often reviewing like this: 'I am
the owner of my deeds and heir to my deeds. Deeds are my womb, my
relative, and my refuge. I shall be the heir of whatever deeds I do,
whether good or bad.'

Then that noble disciple reflects: 'It's not just me who is liable to
grow old, not being exempt from old age. For all sentient beings grow
old according to their nature, as long as they come and go, pass away
and are reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born
in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they
give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who is liable to get sick, not being exempt from
sickness. For all sentient beings get sick according to their nature, as
long as they come and go, pass away and are reborn.' When they review
this subject often, the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop,
and make much of it. By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate
the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who is liable to die, not being exempt from death. For
all sentient beings die according to their nature, as long as they come
and go, pass away and are reborn.' When they review this subject often,
the path is born in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it.
By doing so, they give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying
tendencies.

'It's not just me who must be parted and separated from all I hold dear
and beloved. For all sentient beings must be parted and separated from
all they hold dear and beloved, as long as they come and go, pass away
and are reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born
in them. They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they
give up the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

'It's not just me who shall be the owner of my deeds and heir to my
deeds. For all sentient beings shall be the owners of their deeds and
heirs to their deeds, as long as they come and go, pass away and are
reborn.' When they review this subject often, the path is born in them.
They cultivate, develop, and make much of it. By doing so, they give up
the fetters and eliminate the underlying tendencies.

> For others, sickness is natural,\
> and so are old age and death.\
> Though this is how their nature is,\
> ordinary people feel disgusted.
>
> If I were to be disgusted\
> with creatures whose nature is such,\
> it would not be appropriate for me,\
> since my life is just the same.
>
> Living in such a way,\
> I understood the truth without attachments.\
> I mastered all vanities---\
> of health, of youth,
>
> and even of life---\
> seeing renunciation as sanctuary.\
> Zeal sprang up in me\
> as I looked to extinguishment.
>
> Now I'm unable\
> to indulge in sensual pleasures;\
> there's no turning back,\
> I'm committed to the spiritual life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.58 The Licchavi Youths  *Licchavikumārakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms. Then after the meal, on his return
from almsround, he plunged deep into the Great Wood and sat at the root
of a tree for the day's meditation.

Now at that time several Licchavi youths took strung bows and, escorted
by a pack of hounds, were going for a walk in the Great Wood when they
saw the Buddha seated at the root of a tree. When they saw him, they put
down their strung bows, tied their hounds up to one side, and went up to
him. They bowed and silently paid homage to the Buddha with joined
palms.

Now at that time Mahānāma the Licchavi was going for a walk
in the Great Wood when he saw those Licchavi youths silently paying
homage to the Buddha with joined palms. Seeing this, he went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and expressed this heartfelt
sentiment, "They will become Vajjis! They will become Vajjis!"

"But Mahānāma, why do you say that they will become
Vajjis?"

"Sir, these Licchavi youths are violent, harsh, and brash. Whenever
sweets are left out for families---sugar-cane, jujube fruits, pancakes,
pies, or fritters---they filch them and eat them up. And they hit women
and girls of good families on their backs. But now they're silently
paying homage to the Buddha with joined palms."

"Mahānāma, you can expect only growth, not decline, when
you find five qualities in any gentleman---whether he's an anointed
aristocratic king, an appointed or hereditary official, an army general,
a village chief, a guild chief, or a ruler of his own clan.

What five?

Firstly, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth---earned by his efforts
and initiative, built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of
the brow---to honor, respect, esteem, and venerate his mother and
father. Honored in this way, his mother and father love him with a good
heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a
gentleman is loved by his mother and father, you can expect only growth,
not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate his wives and children, bondservants, workers, and
staff. Honored in this way, his wives and children, bondservants,
workers, and staff love him with a good heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay
alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is loved by his wives and
children, bondservants, workers, and staff, you can expect only growth,
not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate those who work the neighboring fields, and those he
does business with. Honored in this way, those who work the neighboring
fields, and those he does business with love him with a good heart,
wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is
loved by those who work the neighboring fields, and those he does
business with, you can expect only growth, not decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate the deities who receive spirit-offerings. Honored
in this way, the deities who receive spirit-offerings love him with a
good heart, wishing: 'Live long! Stay alive for a long time!' When a
gentleman is loved by the deities, you can expect only growth, not
decline.

Furthermore, a gentleman uses his legitimate wealth to honor, respect,
esteem, and venerate ascetics and brahmins. Honored in this way,
ascetics and brahmins love him with a good heart, wishing: 'Live long!
Stay alive for a long time!' When a gentleman is loved by ascetics and
brahmins, you can expect only growth, not decline.

You can expect only growth, not decline, when you find these five
qualities in any gentleman---whether he's an anointed aristocratic king,
an appointed or hereditary official, an army general, a village chief, a
guild chief, or a ruler of his own clan.

> He's always dutiful to his mother and father,\
> and for the good of his wives and children.\
> He looks after those in his household,\
> and those dependent on him for their livelihood.
>
> A kind and ethical person\
> looks after the welfare of relatives---\
> both those who have passed away,\
> and those alive at present.
>
> While living at home, an astute person\
> uses legitimate means to give rise to joy\
> for ascetics, brahmins,\
> and also the gods.
>
> Having done good,\
> he's venerable and praiseworthy.\
> They praise him in this life,\
> and he departs to rejoice in heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.59 Gone Forth When Old (1st)  *Paṭhamavuḍḍhapabbajitasutta*

"Mendicants, it's hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five
qualities. What five? It's hard to find someone gone forth when old who
is sophisticated, well-presented, and learned, who can teach Dhamma, and
has memorized the monastic law. It's hard to find someone gone forth
when old who has these five qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.60 Gone Forth When Old (2nd)  *Dutiyavuḍḍhapabbajitasutta*

"Mendicants, it's hard to find someone gone forth when old who has five
qualities. What five? It's hard to find someone gone forth when old who
is easy to admonish, retains what they learn, and learns respectfully,
who can teach the Dhamma, and has memorized the monastic law. It's hard
to find someone gone forth when old who has these five qualities."

## The Chapter on Perceptions

### N 5.61 Perceptions (1st)  *Paṭhamasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of ugliness,
death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.62 Perceptions (2nd)  *Dutiyasaññāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death. What five? The perceptions of impermanence,
not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and dissatisfaction with the
whole world. These five perceptions, when developed and cultivated, are
very fruitful and beneficial. They culminate in freedom from death and
end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.63 Growth (1st)  *Paṭhamavaḍḍhisutta*

"Mendicants, a male noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? He
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A male noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> He who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a good man such as he sees clearly,\
> and takes on what is essential for himself in this life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.64 Growth (2nd)  *Dutiyavaḍḍhisutta*

"Mendicants, a female noble disciple who grows in five ways grows nobly,
taking on what is essential and excellent in this life. What five? She
grows in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. A female noble
disciple who grows in these five ways grows nobly, taking on what is
essential and excellent in this life.

> She who grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a virtuous laywoman such as she\
> takes on what is essential for herself in this life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.65 Discussion  *Sākacchasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.66 Sharing Life  *Sājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life
with their spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in immersion.

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in wisdom.

They're personally accomplished in freedom, and they answer questions
posed when discussing accomplishment in freedom.

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions posed when discussing accomplishment in the
knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.67 Bases of Psychic Power (1st)  *Paṭhamaiddhipādasutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five?

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to mental development, and active effort ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort.

And the fifth is sheer vigor.

Any monk or nun who develops and cultivates these five qualities can
expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.68 Bases of Psychic Power (2nd)  *Dutiyaiddhipādasutta*

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still not awake but intent
on awakening---I developed and cultivated five things. What five?

The basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to
energy, and active effort ... the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to mental development, and active effort ... the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. And
the fifth is sheer vigor.

When I had developed and cultivated these five things, with vigor as
fifth, I extended the mind to realize by insight each and every thing
that can be realized by insight; and I was capable of realizing those
things, since each and every one was within range.

If I wished: 'May I multiply myself and become one again ... controlling
the body as far as the realm of divinity.' I was capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range.

If I wished: ... 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my
own insight due to the ending of defilements.' I was capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.69 Disillusionment  *Nibbidāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead
solely to disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight,
awakening, and extinguishment.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.70 The Ending of Defilements  *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to
the ending of defilements. What five? A mendicant meditates observing
the ugliness of the body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives
dissatisfaction with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all
conditions, and has well established the perception of their own death.
These five things, when developed and cultivated, lead to the ending of
defilements."

## The Chapter on a Warrior

### N 5.71 Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (1st)  *Paṭhamacetovimuttiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

What five? A mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the body,
perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the
whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and has well
established the perception of their own death. These five things, when
developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as
their fruit and benefit. When a mendicant has freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom, such a mendicant is one who is called 'one who has
lifted the cross-bar', 'one who has filled in the moat', 'one who has
pulled up the pillar', 'one who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one
with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached'.

And how has a mendicant lifted the cross-bar? It's when a mendicant has
given up ignorance, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has lifted the cross-bar.

And how has a mendicant filled in the moat? It's when a mendicant has
given up transmigrating through births in future lives, cut it off at
the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to
arise in the future. That's how a mendicant has filled in the moat.

And how has a mendicant pulled up the pillar? It's when a mendicant has
given up craving, cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a
mendicant has pulled up the pillar.

And how is a mendicant unimpeded? It's when a mendicant has given up the
five lower fetters, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm
stump, obliterated them, so they're unable to arise in the future.
That's how a mendicant is unimpeded.

And how is a mendicant a noble one with with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached? It's when a mendicant has given up the conceit 'I
am', cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it,
so it's unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant is a noble
one with banner lowered and burden dropped, detached."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.72 Freedom of Heart is the Fruit (2nd)  *Dutiyacetovimuttiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things, when developed and cultivated, have
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit. What
five?

The perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in
impermanence, the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of
giving up, and the perception of fading away.

These five things, when developed and cultivated, have freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom as their fruit and benefit.

When a mendicant has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom, such a
mendicant is one who is called 'one who has lifted the cross-bar', 'one
who has filled in the moat', 'one who has pulled up the pillar', 'one
who is unimpeded', and also 'a noble one with banner lowered and burden
dropped, detached'. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.73 One Who Lives by the Teaching (1st)  *Paṭhamadhammavihārīsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They
spend too much time studying that teaching. They neglect retreat, and
are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That mendicant is
called one who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. They spend too much time advocating that
teaching. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal
serenity of heart. That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not
one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. They spend too much time reciting that teaching. They
neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart.
That mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. They spend too much time thinking about that teaching. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. That
mendicant is called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. They don't spend too much
time studying that teaching. They don't neglect retreat, and they're
committed to internal serenity of heart. That's how a mendicant is one
who lives by the teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.74 One Who Lives by the Teaching (2nd)  *Dutiyadhammavihārīsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'one who lives by the teaching'. How is a mendicant
who lives by the teaching defined?"

"Mendicant, take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements,
mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations,
legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. But
they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is called one
who studies a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning.
That mendicant is called one who advocates a lot, not one who lives by
the teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned
and memorized it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That
mendicant is called one who recites a lot, not one who lives by the
teaching.

Furthermore, a mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in
their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. But they don't understand the higher meaning. That mendicant is
called one who thinks a lot, not one who lives by the teaching.

Take a mendicant who memorizes the teaching---statements, mixed prose &
verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. And they do understand
the higher meaning. That's how a mendicant is one who lives by the
teaching.

So, mendicant, I've taught you the one who studies a lot, the one who
advocates a lot, the one who recites a lot, the one who thinks a lot,
and the one who lives by the teaching. Out of sympathy, I've done what a
teacher should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are
these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice
absorption, mendicant! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This
is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.75 Warriors (1st)  *Paṭhamayodhājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud
of dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some
warriors are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust, but he
falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's crest. He doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. Some warriors are
like that. This is the third warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
Some warriors are like that. This is the fourth warrior found in the
world.

Furthermore, one warrior can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world.

These are the five warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five?

Firstly, one monk falters and founders at the mere sight of a cloud of
dust. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life.
Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns
to a lesser life. What is his 'cloud of dust'? It's when a monk hears:
'In such and such a village or town there's a women or a girl who is
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' Hearing this,
he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'cloud of dust'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who falters and founders at
the mere sight of a cloud of dust. Some people are like that. This is
the first person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust, but at the mere
sight of a banner's crest he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm,
and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to
continue training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. What is
his 'banner's crest'? It's when a monk doesn't hear: 'In such and such a
village or town there's a women or a girl who is attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.' But he sees for himself a
women or a girl who is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing
beauty. Seeing her, he falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and
fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue
training, he rejects it and returns to a lesser life. This is his
'banner's crest'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust, but he falters and founders at the mere sight of a banner's
crest. Some people are like that. This is the second person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest, but he falters and founders at the mere sound of turmoil. He
doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the spiritual life. Declaring
his inability to continue training, he rejects it and returns to a
lesser life. What is his 'turmoil'? It's when a mendicant who has gone
to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is
approached by a female. She smiles, chats, laughs, and teases him. He
falters and founders. He doesn't stay firm, and fails to keep up the
spiritual life. Declaring his inability to continue training, he rejects
it and returns to a lesser life. This is his 'turmoil'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest, but he falters and founders at the mere
sound of turmoil. Some people are like that. This is the third person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, but he's killed or injured when blows are struck.
What is his 'blows are struck'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached
by a female. She sits right by him, lies down, or embraces him. Without
resigning the training and declaring his inability to continue, he has
sex. This is his 'blows are struck'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil, but is killed or injured when
blows are struck. Some people are like that. This is the fourth person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, one monk can prevail over a cloud of dust and a banner's
crest and turmoil, and being struck. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. What is his 'victory in
battle'? It's when a mendicant who has gone to a wilderness, or to the
root of a tree, or to an empty hut is approached by a female. She sits
right by him, lies down, or embraces him. But he disentangles and frees
himself, and goes wherever he wants. He frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw.

Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he
sits down cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes
mindfulness in his presence. Giving up covetousness for the world, he
meditates with a heart rid of covetousness, cleansing the mind of
covetousness. Giving up ill will and malevolence, he meditates with a
mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy for all living beings, cleansing
the mind of ill will. Giving up dullness and drowsiness, he meditates
with a mind rid of dullness and drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful
and aware, cleansing the mind of dullness and drowsiness. Giving up
restlessness and remorse, he meditates without restlessness, his mind
peaceful inside, cleansing the mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving
up doubt, he meditates having gone beyond doubt, not undecided about
skillful qualities, cleansing the mind of doubt. He gives up these five
hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. Then, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, he
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. He truly understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When it is freed, he
knows it is freed.

He understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is his 'victory in battle'.

I say that this person is like the warrior who can prevail over a cloud
of dust and a banner's crest and turmoil and being struck. He wins
victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some
people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a warrior
found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.76 Warriors (2nd)  *Dutiyayodhājīvasutta*

"Mendicants, these five warriors are found in the world. What five?

Firstly, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes kill him and finish him off. Some warriors
are like that. This is the first warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some warriors
are like that. This is the second warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. But he dies of his injuries
while in their care. Some warriors are like that. This is the third
warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He strives and struggles
in the battle, but his foes wound him. He's carried off and taken to his
relatives, who nurse him and care for him. And while in their care, he
recovers from his injuries. Some warriors are like that. This is the
fourth warrior found in the world.

Furthermore, one warrior dons his sword and shield, fastens his bow and
arrows, and plunges into the thick of battle. He wins victory in battle,
establishing himself as foremost in battle. Some warriors are like that.
This is the fifth warrior found in the world. These are the five
warriors found in the world.

In the same way, these five people similar to warriors are found among
the monks. What five? Firstly, a mendicant lives supported by a town or
village. He robes up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
enters a village or town for alms without guarding body, speech, and
mind, without establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the
sense faculties. There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing
clothes. Lust infects his mind, and, without resigning the training and
declaring his inability to continue, he has sex.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is killed and finished
off by his foes. Some people are like that. This is the first person
similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' But while traveling on the
road, before he reaches the monastery he declares his inability to
continue training. He rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who is taken to his relatives
for care, but he dies on the road before he reaches them. Some people
are like that. This is the second person similar to a warrior found
among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
similes of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'Reverends, even though the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give
little gratification and much suffering and distress, and they are all
the more full of drawbacks, I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I
declare my inability to continue training. I reject it and will return
to a lesser life.' Declaring his inability to continue training, he
rejects it and returns to a lesser life.

I say that this person is like the warrior who dies of his injuries
while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that. This is
the third person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town for alms without guarding body, speech, and mind, without
establishing mindfulness, and without restraining the sense faculties.
There he sees a female scantily clad, with revealing clothes. Lust
infects his mind, and his body and mind burn with it. He thinks: 'Why
don't I visit the monastery and tell the monks:

"Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust. I am unable to keep
up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to continue training. I
reject it and will return to a lesser life."' He goes to the monastery
and tells the monks: 'Reverends, I am overcome with lust, mired in lust.
I am unable to keep up the spiritual life. I declare my inability to
continue training. I reject it and will return to a lesser life.'

His spiritual companions advise and instruct him: 'Reverend, the Buddha
says that sensual pleasures give little gratification and much suffering
and distress, and they are all the more full of drawbacks. With the
simile of a skeleton ... a scrap of meat ... a grass torch ... a pit of
glowing coals ... a dream ... borrowed goods ... fruit on a tree ... a
butcher's knife and chopping board ... swords and spears ... a snake's
head, the Buddha says that sensual pleasures give little gratification
and much suffering and distress, and they are all the more full of
drawbacks. Be happy with the spiritual life. Venerable, please don't
declare your inability to continue training, reject it and return to a
lesser life.'

When thus advised and instructed by his spiritual companions, he says:
'I'll try, reverends, I'll struggle, I'll be happy. I won't now declare
my inability to continue training, reject it and return to a lesser
life.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who recovers from his
injuries while in the care of his relatives. Some people are like that.
This is the fourth person similar to a warrior found among the monks.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives supported by a town or village. He robes
up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, enters a village or
town, guarding body, speech, and mind, establishing mindfulness, and
restraining the sense faculties. Seeing a sight with his eyes, he
doesn't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, he practices
restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over
it. Hearing a sound with his ears ... Smelling an odor with his nose ...
Tasting a flavor with his tongue ... Feeling a touch with his body ...
Knowing an idea with his mind, he doesn't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, he practices restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. Then after the meal,
on his return from almsround, he frequents a secluded lodging---a
wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a
charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a heap of straw. Gone to a
wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an empty hut, he sits down
cross-legged, sets his body straight, and establishes mindfulness in his
presence. He gives up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart
that weaken wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first
absorption ... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption.

When his mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---he extends it toward knowledge of
the ending of defilements. He truly understands: 'This is suffering' ...
'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of
suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering'. He truly understands: 'These are defilements' ... 'This is
the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of defilements'
... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of defilements'.
Knowing and seeing like this, his mind is freed from the defilements of
sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When freed, he knows 'it
is freed'. He understands: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has
been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place.'

I say that this person is like the warrior who dons his sword and
shield, fastens his bow and arrows, and plunges into the thick of
battle. He wins victory in battle, establishing himself as foremost in
battle. Some people are like that. This is the fifth person similar to a
warrior found among the monks.

These five people similar to warriors are found among the monks."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.77 Future Perils (1st)  *Paṭhamaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized.

What five? Firstly, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm
living alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might get bitten
by a snake, a scorpion, or a centipede. And if I died from that it would
be an obstacle to my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
This is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might stumble off a
cliff, or get food poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm,
or piercing winds. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
second future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter wild
beasts---a lion, a tiger, a leopard, a bear, or a hyena---which might
take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my
progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
third future peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. While living here alone I might encounter youths
escaping a crime or on their way to commit one, and they might take my
life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my progress.
I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the fourth future
peril ...

Furthermore, a wilderness mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm living
alone in a wilderness. But in a wilderness there are savage monsters who
might take my life. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to
my progress. I'd better rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' This is the
fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
wilderness mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for
attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the
unrealized."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.78 Future Perils (2nd)  *Dutiyaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing these five future perils is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
What five?

A mendicant reflects: 'Currently I'm a youth, young, with pristine black
hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of life. But there will come a
time when this body is struck with old age. When you're old, overcome by
old age, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and
it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing
happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That
way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though I'm old.' This
is the first future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, I'm rarely ill or unwell.
My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. But there will come a time when this body
is struck with sickness. When you're sick, overcome by sickness, it's
not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy
to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before
that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better
preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving
the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even though I'm sick.' This is the second future
peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, there's plenty of food, a
good harvest, so it's easy to get almsfood, and easy to keep going by
collecting alms. But there will come a time of famine, a bad harvest,
when it's hard to get almsfood, and not easy to keep going by collecting
alms. In a time of famine, people move to where there's plenty of food,
where they live crowded and cramped together. When you live crowded and
cramped together, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the
Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
thing happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
That way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though there's a
famine.' This is the third future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, people live in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, blending like milk and
water, and regarding each other with kindly eyes. But there will come a
time of peril due to turmoil in the wilds, so the countryfolk mount
their vehicles and flee everywhere. In a time of peril, people move to
where there's sanctuary, where they live crowded and cramped together.
When you live crowded and cramped together, it's not easy to focus on
the instructions of the Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. Before that unlikable,
undesirable, and disagreeable thing happens, I'd better preempt it by
rousing up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. That way, when it happens,
I'll live comfortably even in a time of peril.' This is the fourth
future peril ...

Furthermore, a mendicant reflects: 'Currently, the Saṅgha
lives comfortably, in harmony, appreciating each other, without
quarreling, with one recitation. But there will come a time of schism in
the Saṅgha. When there is schism in the
Saṅgha, it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the
Buddhas, and it's not easy to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. Before that unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable
thing happens, I'd better preempt it by rousing up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
That way, when it happens, I'll live comfortably even though there's
schism in the Saṅgha.' This is the fifth future peril ...

These are the five future perils, seeing which is quite enough for a
mendicant to meditate diligently, keenly, and resolutely for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.79 Future Perils (3rd)  *Tatiyaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
ordain others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind,
and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. They too will ordain others, but be unable to guide
them in the higher ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop
their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the first future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They will
give dependence to others, but be unable to guide them in the higher
ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will not develop their physical
endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. They too will give dependence to
others, but be unable to guide them in the higher ethics, mind, and
wisdom. They too will not develop their physical endurance, ethics,
mind, and wisdom. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
second future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. In
discussion about the teachings and elaborations they'll fall into dark
ideas without realizing it. And that is how corrupt training comes from
corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training.
This is the third future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. When
discourses spoken by the Realized One---deep, profound, transcendent,
dealing with emptiness---are being recited they won't want to listen.
They won't actively listen or try to understand, nor will they think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. But when discourses
composed by poets---poetry, with fancy words and phrases, composed by
outsiders or spoken by disciples---are being recited they will want to
listen. They'll actively listen and try to understand, and they'll think
those teachings are worth learning and memorizing. And that is how
corrupt training comes from corrupt teachings, and corrupt teachings
come from corrupt training. This is the fourth future peril that has not
currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who have not
developed their physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. The senior
mendicants will be indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding,
neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. Those who come
after them will follow their example. They too will become indulgent and
slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy
for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing
the unrealized. And that is how corrupt training comes from corrupt
teachings, and corrupt teachings come from corrupt training. This is the
fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the
future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them, and try to give
them up."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.80 Future Perils (4th)  *Catutthaanāgatabhayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five future perils have not currently arisen, but
they will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to
give them up.

What five? In a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
robes. They will neglect the practice of wearing rag robes and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get robes in many kinds
of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the first future peril that has
not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
almsfood. They will neglect the practice of walking for almsfood and the
practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness and the
forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital cities
and make their homes there. And they will try to get almsfood in many
kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the second future peril
that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who like nice
lodgings. They will neglect the practice of staying at the root of a
tree and the practice of frequenting remote lodgings in the wilderness
and the forest. They will come down to the villages, towns, and capital
cities and make their homes there. And they will try to get lodgings in
many kinds of wrong and inappropriate ways. This is the third future
peril that has not currently arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with nuns, trainee nuns, and novice nuns. In such conditions, it can be
expected that they will lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit
one of the corrupt offenses, or reject the training and return to a
lesser life. This is the fourth future peril that has not currently
arisen, but will arise in the future ...

Furthermore, in a future time there will be mendicants who mix closely
with monastery attendants and novices. In such conditions it can be
expected that they will engage in storing up goods for their own use,
and making obvious hints about digging the earth and cutting plants.
This is the fifth future peril that has not currently arisen, but will
arise in the future ...

These are the five future perils that have not currently arisen, but
will arise in the future. You should look out for them and try to give
them up."

## The Chapter on Senior Mendicants

### N 5.81 Desirable  *Rajanīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They desire the desirable, they hate the hateful, they're
deluded by the delusory, they're annoyed by the annoying, and they're
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is unlikable and disagreeable by their spiritual companions,
not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't
desire the desirable, they don't hate the hateful, they're not deluded
by the delusory, they're not annoyed by the annoying, and they're not
intoxicated by the intoxicating. A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected
and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.82 Free of Greed  *Vītarāgasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They're not free of greed, hate, and delusion; they are
offensive and contemptuous. A senior mendicant with these five qualities
is unlikable and disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not
respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're free of
greed, hate, and delusion; they're not offensive and contemptuous. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.83 Deceiver  *Kuhakasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They use deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and they
use material things to chase after other material things. A senior
mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and disagreeable to
their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They don't use
deceit, flattery, hinting, or belittling, and they don't use material
things to chase after other material things. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.84 Faithless  *Assaddhasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They're faithless, shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. A
senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and disagreeable
to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They're
faithful, conscientious, prudent, energetic, and wise. A senior
mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.85 Cannot Endure  *Akkhamasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.
What five? They can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and
touches. A senior mendicant with these five qualities is unlikable and
disagreeable to their spiritual companions, not respected or admired.

A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A senior mendicant with
these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions,
respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.86 Attaining the Methods of Textual Analysis  *Paṭisambhidāpattasutta*

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five? They have
attained the textual analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and
eloquence. And they are deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. A senior mendicant
with these five qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual
companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.87 Ethical  *Sīlavantasutta*

"A senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to their
spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.88 Senior Mendicants  *Therasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the
detriment and suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following that includes both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

But they have wrong view and distorted perspective. They draw many
people away from the true teaching and establish them in false
teachings.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the detriment and suffering of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans.

A senior mendicant who has five qualities is acting for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

What five?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're well-known, famous, with a large following, including both
laypeople and renunciates.

They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

And they have right view and an undistorted perspective. They draw many
people away from false teachings and establish them in the true
teaching.

People follow their example, thinking that the senior mendicant is
senior and has long gone forth. Or that they're well-known, famous, with
a large following that includes both laypeople and renunciates. Or that
they receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. Or that they're very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. A senior mendicant who has these five qualities is
acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for the people, for
the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.89 A Trainee (1st)  *Paṭhamasekhasutta*

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they don't review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. And they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. These five things don't lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.90 A Trainee (2nd)  *Dutiyasekhasutta*

"These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee has many duties and responsibilities, and
is competent in many tasks. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the first thing that leads to the
decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee spends too much time doing trivial
work. They neglect retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that leads to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee mixes closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the third thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee enters the town at the wrong time, and
returns too late in the day. They neglect retreat, and are not committed
to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that leads to
the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't get to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They neglect
retreat, and are not committed to internal serenity of heart. This is
the fifth thing that leads to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
five?

Firstly, a mendicant trainee doesn't have many duties and
responsibilities, even though they are competent in many tasks. They
don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart.
This is the first thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't waste their day doing trivial
work. They don't neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity
of heart. This is the second thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the third thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee doesn't enter the village too early or
return too late in the day. They don't neglect retreat, and are
committed to internal serenity of heart. This is the fourth thing that
doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant trainee gets to take part in talk about
self-effacement that helps open the heart, when they want, without
trouble or difficulty. That is, talk about fewness of wishes,
contentment, seclusion, aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom. They don't
neglect retreat, and are committed to internal serenity of heart. This
is the fifth thing that doesn't lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee."

## The Chapter with Kakudha

### N 5.91 Accomplishments (1st)  *Paṭhamasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom. These are the five
accomplishments."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.92 Accomplishment (2nd)  *Dutiyasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment
in ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. These are the five accomplishments."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.93 Declarations  *Byākaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five ways of declaring enlightenment. What five?
One declares enlightenment out of stupidity and folly. Or because of
corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of madness and
mental disorder. Or out of overestimation. Or one declares enlightenment
rightly. These are the five ways of declaring enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.94 Living Comfortably  *Phāsuvihārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?
It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption
... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... They realize the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. These are the five ways of living comfortably."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.95 Unshakable  *Akuppasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five things will soon penetrate the
unshakable. What five? It's when a mendicant has attained the textual
analysis of meaning, text, terminology, and eloquence, and they review
the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.96 Remembering What You've Learned  *Sutadharasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant cultivating mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.97 Talk  *Kathāsutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five?

It's when a mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is
unburdensome and contented with life's necessities.

They eat little, not devoted to filling their stomach.

They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to wakefulness.

They get to take part in talk about self-effacement that helps open the
heart, when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That is, talk
about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion, keeping your distance,
arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge
and vision of freedom.

They review the extent of their mind's freedom.

A mendicant developing mindfulness of breathing who has these five
things will soon penetrate the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.98 In the Wilderness  *Āraññakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant practicing mindfulness of breathing who has
five things will soon penetrate the unshakable. What five? It's when a
mendicant has few requirements and duties, and is unburdensome and
contented with life's necessities. They eat little, not devoted to
filling their stomach. They are rarely drowsy, and are dedicated to
wakefulness. They live in the wilderness, in remote lodgings. They
review the extent of their mind's freedom. A mendicant practicing
mindfulness of breathing who has these five things will soon penetrate
the unshakable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.99 The Lion  *Sīhasutta*

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. If he strikes an
elephant, he does it carefully, not carelessly. If he strikes a buffalo
... a cow ... a leopard ... or any smaller creatures---even a hare or a
cat---he does it carefully, not carelessly. Why is that? Thinking: 'May
I not lose my way.'

'Lion' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly,
this is his lion's roar. When the Realized One teaches the monks ...
nuns ... laymen ... laywomen ... or ordinary people---even food-carriers
and hunters---he teaches them carefully, not carelessly. Why is that?
Because the Realized One has respect and reverence for the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.100 With Kakudha  *Kakudhatherasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

At that time the Koliyan named Kakudha---Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna's supporter---had recently passed away and
been reborn in a certain host of mind-made gods. He was reincarnated in
a life-form that was two or three times the size of a Magadhan village
with its fields. But with that life-form he didn't obstruct himself or
others.

Then the god Kakudha went up to Venerable Mahāmoggallāna,
bowed, stood to one side, and said to him, "Sir, this fixed desire arose
in Devadatta: 'I shall lead the mendicant Saṅgha.' And as
that thought arose, Devadatta lost that psychic power."

That's what the god Kakudha said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled
Mahāmoggallāna, keeping him on his right side, before
vanishing right there.

Then Mahāmoggallāna went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and told him what had happened.

"But Moggallāna, did you comprehend the god Kakudha's mind,
and know that everything he says is correct and not otherwise?"

"Indeed I did, sir."

"Mark these words, Moggallāna! Mark these words! Now that
futile man Devadatta will expose himself by his own deeds.

Moggallāna, there are these five teachers found in the
world. What five?

Firstly, some teacher with impure conduct claims: 'I am pure in ethics.
My ethical conduct is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure ethical conduct, but claims to be
ethically pure. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's conduct, and the teacher expects
them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure livelihood claims: 'I am pure in
livelihood. My livelihood is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their
disciples know: 'This teacher has impure livelihood, but claims to have
pure livelihood. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople.
And how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they
consent to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. A person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of
such a teacher cover up their teacher's livelihood, and the teacher
expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure teaching claims: 'I am pure in
teaching. My teaching is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure teaching, but claims to have pure
teaching. They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And
how could we treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent
to robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A
person will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a
teacher cover up their teacher's teaching, and the teacher expects them
to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure answers claims: 'I am pure in how
I answer. My answers are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' But their disciples
know: 'This teacher has impure answers, but claims to have pure answers.
They wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's answers, and the teacher expects them to do so.

Furthermore, some teacher with impure knowledge and vision claims: 'I am
pure in knowledge and vision. My knowledge and vision are pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' But their disciples know: 'This teacher has impure
knowledge and vision, but claims to have pure knowledge and vision. They
wouldn't like it if we were to tell the laypeople. And how could we
treat them in a way that they don't like? But they consent to robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. A person
will be recognized by their own deeds.' The disciples of such a teacher
cover up their teacher's knowledge and vision, and the teacher expects
them to do so. These are the five teachers found in the world.

But Moggallāna, I have pure ethical conduct, and I claim:
'I am pure in ethical conduct. My ethical conduct is pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my conduct, and I don't expect
them to. I have pure livelihood, and I claim: 'I am pure in livelihood.
My livelihood is pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up
my livelihood, and I don't expect them to. I have pure teaching, and I
claim: 'I am pure in teaching. My teaching is pure, bright,
uncorrupted.' My disciples don't cover up my teaching, and I don't
expect them to. I have pure answers, and I claim: 'I am pure in how I
answer. My answers are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't
cover up my answers, and I don't expect them to. I have pure knowledge
and vision, and I claim: 'I am pure in knowledge and vision. My
knowledge and vision are pure, bright, uncorrupted.' My disciples don't
cover up my knowledge and vision, and I don't expect them to."


## The Chapter on Living Comfortably

### N 5.101 Assurance  *Sārajjasutta*

"Mendicants, these five qualities make a trainee assured. What five?
It's when a mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and
wise.

A person of faith doesn't have the insecurities of someone who lacks
faith. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An ethical person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is
unethical. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

A learned person doesn't have the insecurities of a person of little
learning. So this quality makes a trainee assured.

An energetic person doesn't have the insecurities of a lazy person. So
this quality makes a trainee assured.

A wise person doesn't have the insecurities of someone who is witless.
So this quality makes a trainee assured.

These are the five qualities that make a trainee assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.102 Suspected  *Ussaṅkitasutta*

"Mendicants, even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be
suspected and distrusted as a 'bad monk' for five reasons.

What five? It's when a monk resorts to prostitutes, widows, voluptuous
girls, eunuchs, or nuns for alms.

Even if a monk is of impeccable character, he might be suspected and
distrusted as a 'bad monk' for these five reasons."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.103 A Master Thief  *Mahācorasutta*

"Mendicants, a master thief with five factors breaks into houses,
plunders wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway
robbery. What five? A master thief relies on rough ground, on thick
cover, and on powerful individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a master thief rely on rough ground? It's when a master
thief relies on inaccessible riverlands or rugged mountains. That's how
a master thief relies on rough ground.

And how does a master thief rely on thick cover? It's when a master
thief relies on thick grass, thick trees, a blind spot, or a large
forest grove. That's how a master thief relies on thick cover.

And how does a master thief rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
master thief relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a master thief pay bribes? It's when a master thief is
rich, affluent, and wealthy. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of
anything, I'll settle it with a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a master thief pays bribes.

And how does a master thief act alone? It's when a master thief carries
out robbery all alone. Why is that? So that their secret plans are not
leaked to others. That's how a master thief acts alone.

A master thief with these five factors breaks into houses, plunders
wealth, steals from isolated buildings, and commits highway robbery.

In the same way, when a bad mendicant has five qualities, they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What five? A bad
mendicant relies on rough ground, on thick cover, and on powerful
individuals; they pay bribes, and they act alone.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on rough ground? It's when a bad
mendicant has unethical conduct by way of body, speech, and mind. That's
how a bad mendicant relies on rough ground.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on thick cover? It's when a bad
mendicant has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist view. That's how
a bad mendicant relies on thick cover.

And how does a bad mendicant rely on powerful individuals? It's when a
bad mendicant relies on rulers or their chief ministers. They think: 'If
anyone accuses me of anything, these rulers or their chief ministers
will speak in my defense in the case.' And that's exactly what happens.
That's how a bad mendicant relies on powerful individuals.

And how does a bad mendicant pay bribes? It's when a bad mendicant
receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. They think: 'If anyone accuses me of anything, I'll settle it with
a bribe.' And that's exactly what happens. That's how a bad mendicant
pays bribes.

And how does a bad mendicant act alone? It's when a bad mendicant dwells
alone in the borderlands. They visit families there to acquire material
things. That's how a bad mendicant acts alone.

When a bad mendicant has these five qualities, they keep themselves
broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized by sensible
people, and they create much wickedness."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.104 An Exquisite Ascetic of Ascetics  *Samaṇasukhumālasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

What five?

It's when a mendicant usually uses only what they've been invited to
accept---robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick---rarely using them without invitation.

When living with other spiritual practitioners, they usually find
themselves treated agreeably by them by way of body, speech, and mind,
and rarely disagreeably. And they are usually presented with agreeable
things by them, rarely with disagreeable ones.

They're healthy, so the various unpleasant feelings---stemming from
disorders of bile, phlegm, wind, or their conjunction; or caused by
change in weather, by not taking care of themselves, by overexertion, or
as the result of past deeds---usually don't come up.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics.

And if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of ascetics,
it's me. For I usually use only what I've been invited to accept. When
living with other mendicants, I am usually treated agreeably by them.
And I usually present them with agreeable things. I'm healthy. I get the
four absorptions when I want, without trouble or difficulty. And I've
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. So if anyone should be rightly called an exquisite ascetic of
ascetics, it's me."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.105 Living Comfortably  *Phāsuvihārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five ways of living comfortably. What five?

It's when a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both in public and in
private.

They live according to the precepts shared with their spiritual
companions, both in public and in private. Those precepts are intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible
people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering.

These are the five ways of living comfortably."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.106 With Ānanda  *Ānandasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Sir, how could a mendicant live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own ethical conduct, but
they don't urge others to be ethical. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. That's how a mendicant could
live comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community."

"But sir, could there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. That's how
a mendicant could live comfortably while staying in a monastic
community."

"But sir, might there be another way for a mendicant to live comfortably
while staying in a monastic community?"

"There could, Ānanda. It's when a mendicant is accomplished in their own
ethical conduct, but they don't urge others to be ethical. And they
watch themselves, but don't watch others. And they're not well-known,
but aren't bothered by that. And they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty. And they
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. That's how a mendicant could live
comfortably while staying in a monastic community.

And I say that there is no better or finer way of living comfortably
than this."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.107 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when a mendicant is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.108 An adept  *Asekhasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? It's when they have the entire spectrum of the adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and knowledge and vision of freedom.
A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.109 All Four Quarters  *Cātuddisasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is at ease in any quarter.
What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these five qualities is at ease in any quarter."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.110 Wilderness  *Araññasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has five qualities they're ready to
frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They live with energy roused up. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

When a mendicant has these five qualities they're ready to frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest."

## The Chapter at Andhakavinda

### N 5.111 Visiting Families  *Kulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities who visits families is
unlikable and disagreeable, not respected or admired. What five? They
act as though they're close to people they hardly know. They give away
things they don't own. They over-associate with close friends. They
whisper in the ear. And they ask for too much. A mendicant with these
five qualities who visits families is unlikable and disagreeable, not
respected or admired.

A mendicant with five qualities who visits families is dear and beloved,
respected and admired. What five? They don't act as though they're close
to people they hardly know. They don't give away things they don't own.
They don't over-associate with close friends. They don't whisper in the
ear. And they don't ask for too much. A mendicant with these five
qualities who visits families is dear and beloved, respected and
admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.112 An Ascetic to Follow Behind on Almsround  *Pacchāsamaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, you shouldn't take an ascetic with five qualities to follow
behind on almsround. What five? They walk too far away or too close
behind. They don't take your bowl when it's full. They don't warn you
when your speech is bordering on an offense. They keep on interrupting
while you're speaking. And they're witless, dull, and idiotic. You
shouldn't take an ascetic with these five qualities to follow behind on
almsround.

You should take an ascetic with five qualities to follow behind on
almsround. What five? They don't walk too far away or too close behind.
They take your bowl when it is full. They warn you when your speech is
bordering on an offense. They don't interrupt while you're speaking. And
they're wise, bright, and clever. You should take an ascetic with these
five qualities to follow behind on almsround."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.113 Right Immersion  *Sammāsamādhisutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has five qualities can't enter and remain
in right immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these
five qualities can't enter and remain in right immersion.

A mendicant who has five qualities can enter and remain in right
immersion. What five? It's when a mendicant can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant who has these five qualities
can enter and remain in right immersion."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.114 At Andhakavinda  *Andhakavindasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Magadhans at
Andhakavinda. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly
come to this teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and
established in five things. What five?

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in restraint in
the monastic code: 'Reverends, please be ethical. Live restrained in the
monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules
you've undertaken.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in sense
restraint: 'Reverends, please live with sense doors guarded, mindfully
alert and on guard, with protected mind, having a heart protected by
mindfulness.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in limiting their
speech: 'Reverends, please speak little. Put a limit on your speech.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in retreat:
'Reverends, please live in the wilderness. Frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest.'

They should be encouraged, supported, and established in right
perspective: 'Reverends, please hold right view and have right
perspective.'

Those mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this
teaching and training should be encouraged, supported, and established
in these five things."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.115 Stingy  *Maccharinīsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
She is stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? She is not
stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, or the
teaching. A nun with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.116 Praise  *Vaṇṇanāsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She arouses faith
in things that are dubious, and doesn't arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She doesn't arouse faith in
things that are dubious, and does arouse faith in things that are
inspiring. And she doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.117 Jealous  *Issukinīsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She is jealous,
stingy, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She is not jealous, or stingy,
and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five qualities
is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.118 Having Wrong View  *Micchādiṭṭhikasutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong view
and wrong thought, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right view and right
thought, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.119 Wrong Speech  *Micchāvācāsutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
speech and wrong action, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right speech and right
action, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.120 Wrong Effort  *Micchāvāyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, a nun with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
Without examining or scrutinizing, she praises those deserving of
criticism, and criticizes those deserving of praise. She has wrong
effort and wrong mindfulness, and wastes gifts given in faith. A nun
with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A nun with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? After
examining and scrutinizing, she criticizes those deserving of criticism,
and praises those deserving of praise. She has right effort and right
mindfulness, and doesn't waste gifts given in faith. A nun with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

## The Chapter on Sick

### N 5.121 Sick  *Gilānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then in the late
afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to the infirmary,
where he saw a certain mendicant who was weak and sick. He sat down on
the seat spread out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, if a weak and sick mendicant does not neglect five things,
it can be expected that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized
it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

What five? It's when a mendicant meditates observing the ugliness of the
body, perceives the repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction
with the whole world, observes the impermanence of all conditions, and
has well established the perception of their own death. If a weak and
sick mendicant does not neglect these five things, it can be expected
that they will soon realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.122 Mindfulness Well Established  *Satisūpaṭṭhitasutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who develops and cultivates five qualities
can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very life, or if
there's something left over, non-return.

What five? It's when a mendicant has well established mindfulness inside
themselves in order to understand the arising and passing away of
phenomena, meditates observing the ugliness of the body, perceives the
repulsiveness of food, perceives dissatisfaction with the whole world,
and observes the impermanence of all conditions. Any monk or nun who
develops and cultivates these five qualities can expect one of two
results: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's something left
over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.123 A Carer (1st)  *Paṭhamaupaṭṭhākasutta*

"Mendicants, a patient with five qualities is hard to care for. What
five? They do what is unsuitable. They don't know moderation in what is
suitable. They don't take their medicine. Though their carer wants
what's best for them, they don't accurately report their symptoms by
saying when they're getting worse, getting better, or staying the same.
And they cannot endure physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant,
disagreeable, and life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities
is hard to care for.

A patient with five qualities is easy to care for. What five? They do
what is suitable. They know moderation in what is suitable. They take
their medicine. Because their carer wants what's best for them, they
accurately report their symptoms by saying when they're getting worse,
getting better, or staying the same. And they can endure physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. A patient with these five qualities is easy to care
for."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.124 A Carer (2nd)  *Dutiyaupaṭṭhākasutta*

"Mendicants, a carer with five qualities is not competent to care for a
patient. What five? They're unable to prepare medicine. They don't know
what is suitable and unsuitable, so they supply what is unsuitable and
remove what is suitable. They care for the sick for the sake of material
benefits, not out of love. They're disgusted to remove feces, urine,
vomit, or spit. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire up, and
inspire the patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with
these five qualities is not competent to care for a patient.

A carer with five qualities is competent to care for a patient. What
five? They're able to prepare medicine. They know what is suitable and
unsuitable, so they remove what is unsuitable and supply what is
suitable. They care for the sick out of love, not for the sake of
material benefits. They're not disgusted to remove feces, urine, vomit,
or spit. They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire the
patient with a Dhamma talk from time to time. A carer with these five
qualities is competent to care for a patient."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.125 Longevity (1st)  *Paṭhamaanāyussāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, activity at unsuitable times, and unchastity.
These are the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
activity at suitable times, and celibacy. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.126 Longevity (2nd)  *Dutiyaanāyussāsutta*

"Mendicants, these five things impede longevity. What five? Doing what
is unsuitable, not knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food
unfit for consumption, unethical behavior, and bad friends. These are
the five things that impede longevity.

These five things promote longevity. What five? Doing what is suitable,
knowing moderation in what is suitable, eating food fit for consumption,
ethical conduct, and good friends. These are the five things that
promote longevity."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.127 Living Apart  *Vapakāsasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is not fit to live apart
from a Saṅgha community. What five? It's when a mendicant
is not content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. And they have a lot of sensual thoughts. A
mendicant with these five qualities is not fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community.

A mendicant with five qualities is fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community. What five? It's when a mendicant is
content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And they think a lot about renunciation. A
mendicant with these five qualities is fit to live apart from a
Saṅgha community."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.128 An Ascetic's Happiness  *Samaṇasukhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of suffering for an ascetic.
What five? It's when a mendicant is not content with any kind of robe,
almsfood, lodging, and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they
lead the spiritual life dissatisfied. These are five kinds of suffering
for an ascetic.

There are these five kinds of happiness for an ascetic. What five? It's
when a mendicant is content with any kind of robe, almsfood, lodging,
and medicines and supplies for the sick. And they lead the spiritual
life satisfied. These are five kinds of happiness for an ascetic."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.129 Fatal Wounds  *Parikuppasutta*

"Mendicants, these five fatal wounds lead to a place of loss, to hell.
What five? Murdering your mother or father or a perfected one;
maliciously shedding the blood of a Realized One; and causing a schism
in the Saṅgha. These five fatal wounds lead to a place of
loss, to hell."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.130 Loss  *Byasanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five losses. What five? Loss of relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of loss of
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics or view that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five losses.

There are these five endowments. What five? Endowment with relatives,
wealth, health, ethics, and view. It is not because of endowment with
relatives, wealth, or health that sentient beings, when their body
breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. It
is because of endowment with ethics or view that sentient beings, when
their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm. These are the five endowments."

## The Chapter on Kings

### N 5.131 Wielding Power (1st)  *Paṭhamacakkānuvattanasutta*

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch wields
power only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined
by any human enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch knows what is right, knows principle,
knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. A
wheel-turning monarch who possesses these five factors wields power only
in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities a Realized One, a perfected
one, a fully awakened Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma
only in a principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any
ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone
in the world.

What five? A Realized One knows what is right, knows principle, knows
moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly. Possessing
these five qualities a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a principled
manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic or brahmin
or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.132 Wielding Power (2nd)  *Dutiyacakkānuvattanasutta*

"Mendicants, possessing five factors a wheel-turning monarch's eldest
son continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in a
principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

What five? A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son knows what is right,
knows principle, knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the
assembly. A wheel-turning monarch's oldest son who possesses these five
factors continues to wield the power set in motion by his father only in
a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any human
enemy.

In the same way, possessing five qualities Sāriputta
rightly keeps rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth
by the Realized One. And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic
or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world.

What five? Sāriputta knows what is right, knows principle,
knows moderation, knows the right time, and knows the assembly.
Possessing these five qualities Sāriputta rightly keeps
rolling the supreme Wheel of Dhamma that was rolled forth by the
Realized One. And that wheel cannot be turned back by any ascetic or
brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.133 A Principled King  *Dhammarājāsutta*

"Mendicants, even a wheel-turning monarch, a just and principled king,
does not wield power without having their own king."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But who is
the king of the wheel-turning monarch, the just and principled king?"

"It is principle, monk," said the Buddha.

"Monk, a wheel-turning monarch provides just protection and security for
his court, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting, and
venerating principle, having principle as his flag, banner, and
authority.

He provides just protection and security for his aristocrats, vassals,
troops, brahmins and householders, people of town and country, ascetics
and brahmins, beasts and birds. When he has done this, he wields power
only in a principled manner. And this power cannot be undermined by any
human enemy.

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the monks, relying only on principle---honoring,
respecting, and venerating principle, having principle as his flag,
banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily action should be cultivated.
This kind of bodily action should not be cultivated. This kind of verbal
action should be cultivated. This kind of verbal action should not be
cultivated. This kind of mental action should be cultivated. This kind
of mental action should not be cultivated. This kind of livelihood
should be cultivated. This kind of livelihood should not be cultivated.
This kind of village or town should be cultivated. This kind of village
or town should not be cultivated.'

In the same way, monk, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha, a just and principled king, provides just protection and
security for the nuns ... laymen ... laywomen, relying only on
principle---honoring, respecting, and venerating principle, having
principle as his flag, banner, and authority. 'This kind of bodily
action should be cultivated. This kind of bodily action should not be
cultivated. This kind of verbal action should be cultivated. This kind
of verbal action should not be cultivated. This kind of mental action
should be cultivated. This kind of mental action should not be
cultivated. This kind of livelihood should be cultivated. This kind of
livelihood should not be cultivated. This kind of village or town should
be cultivated. This kind of village or town should not be cultivated.'

When a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha has
provided just protection and security for the monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen, he rolls forth the supreme Wheel of Dhamma only in a
principled manner. And that wheel cannot be rolled back by any ascetic
or brahmin or god or Māra or divinity or by anyone in the
world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.134 In Whatever Region  *Yassaṁdisaṁsutta*

"Mendicants, with five factors an anointed aristocratic king lives in
his own realm, no matter what region he lives in.

What five?

An anointed aristocratic king is well born on both his mother's and
father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable and impeccable
genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is rich, affluent, and wealthy, with a full treasury and storehouses.

He is powerful, having an army of four divisions that is obedient and
carries out instructions.

He has a commander who is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to
think issues through as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

These four things bring his glory to fruition.

With these five qualities, including glory, an anointed aristocratic
king lives in his own realm, no matter what direction he lives in. Why
is that? Because that is how it is for victors.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities lives with mind freed,
no matter what region they live in. What five?

It's when mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. This is like the anointed aristocratic king's impeccable
birth.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically. This is like the anointed aristocratic
king being rich, affluent, and wealthy, with full treasury and
storehouses.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is
like the anointed aristocratic king having power.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This
is like the anointed aristocratic king having a commander.

These four qualities bring their freedom to fruition.

With these five qualities, including freedom, they live in their own
realm, no matter what region they live in. Why is that? Because that is
how it is for those whose mind is free."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.135 Aspiration (1st)  *Paṭhamapatthanāsutta*

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to kingship. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the people of town and country.

He is trained and skilled in the arts of anointed aristocratic kings,
such as elephant riding, horse riding, driving a chariot, archery, and
swordsmanship.

He thinks: 'I'm well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. Why shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to my parents. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship? I'm dear and beloved to the people of town and country. Why
shouldn't I aspire to kingship? I'm trained and skilled in the arts of
anointed aristocratic kings, such as elephant riding, horse riding,
driving a chariot, archery, and swordsmanship. Why shouldn't I aspire to
kingship?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant has faith in the Realized One's awakening: 'That
Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They are rarely ill or unwell. Their stomach digests well, being neither
too hot nor too cold, but just right, and fit for meditation.

They're not devious or deceitful. They reveal themselves honestly to the
Teacher or sensible spiritual companions.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I am a person of faith; I have faith in the Realized One's
awakening ... Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm rarely
ill or unwell. My stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and fit for meditation. Why shouldn't I aspire to
end the defilements? I'm not devious or deceitful. I reveal myself
honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual companions. Why shouldn't
I aspire to end the defilements? I live with energy roused up for giving
up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. I'm strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. Why shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements? I'm
wise. I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?'

A mendicant with these five qualities aspires to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.136 Aspiration (2nd)  *Dutiyapatthanāsutta*

"Mendicants, an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with five
factors aspires to become a viceroy. What five?

It's when an anointed aristocratic king's eldest son is well born on
both his mother's and father's side, of pure descent, with irrefutable
and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh paternal generation.

He is attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

He is dear and beloved to his parents.

He is dear and beloved to the armed forces.

He is astute, competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through
as they bear upon the past, future, and present.

He thinks: 'I'm well born ... attractive ... dear and beloved to my
parents ... dear and beloved to the armed forces ... I'm astute,
competent, and intelligent, able to think issues through as they bear
upon the past, future, and present. Why shouldn't I aspire to become a
viceroy?' An anointed aristocratic king's eldest son with these five
factors aspires to become a viceroy.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities aspires to end the
defilements. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

Their mind is firmly established in the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation.

They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and
embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not
slacking off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.

They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is
noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering.

They think: 'I'm ethical ... learned ... mindful ... energetic ... wise.
I have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. Why
shouldn't I aspire to end the defilements?' A mendicant with these five
qualities aspires to end the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.137 Little Sleep  *Appaṁsupatisutta*

"Mendicants, these five sleep little at night, staying mostly awake.
What five? A woman longing for a man. A man longing for a woman. A thief
longing for their loot. A king busy with his duties. A mendicant longing
for freedom from the yoke. These five sleep little at night, staying
mostly awake."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.138 Eating Food  *Bhattādakasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors eats food, takes up
space, drops dung, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a
royal bull elephant. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A royal bull
elephant with these five factors eats food, takes up space, drops dung,
and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a royal bull elephant.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities eats food, takes up
space, tramples beds and chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still
considered to be a mendicant. What five? It's when a mendicant can't
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches. A mendicant with
these five qualities eats food, takes up space, tramples beds and
chairs, and takes a ticket, yet is still considered to be a mendicant."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.139 Cannot Endure  *Akkhamasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is not worthy of a
king, not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of
kingship. What five? It's when a royal bull elephant can't endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sights? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sight
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry. It
doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can't endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure sounds? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders at the sound
of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or
the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure smells? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it smells
the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree royal bull
elephants. It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's
how a royal bull elephant can't endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure tastes? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when it misses
a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five meals.
It doesn't stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a
royal bull elephant can't endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can't endure touches? It's when
a royal bull elephant gone to battle falters and founders when struck by
a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows. It doesn't
stay firm, and fails to plunge into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can't endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is not worthy of a king,
not fit to serve a king, and is not considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is not worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy
of a religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and
is not the supreme field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a
mendicant can't endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sights? It's when a
mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes, is aroused by a desirable
sight, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure sounds? It's when a
mendicant, hearing a sound with their ears, is aroused by a desirable
sound, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure smells? It's when a
mendicant, smelling an odor with their nose, is aroused by a desirable
smell, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure tastes? It's when a
mendicant, tasting a flavor with their tongue, is aroused by desirable
tastes, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can't endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is aroused by a desirable
touch, so is not able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can't
endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is not worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, not worthy of hospitality, not worthy of a
religious donation, not worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is
not the supreme field of merit for the world.

A royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a king, fit to
serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What five? It's
when a royal bull elephant can endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
and touches.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sights? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder at the
sight of a division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of
infantry. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal
bull elephant can endure sights.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure sounds? It's when a
royal bull elephant does not falter or founder at the sound of a
division of elephants, of cavalry, of chariots, or of infantry, or the
thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and cymbals. It stays firm,
and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant can endure
sounds.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure smells? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
smells the odor of the feces and urine of battle-hardened, pedigree
royal bull elephants. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how
a royal bull elephant can endure smells.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure tastes? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when it
misses a meal of grass and water, or it misses two, three, four, or five
meals. It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull
elephant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a royal bull elephant can endure touches? It's when a
royal bull elephant gone to battle does not falter or founder when
struck by a swift arrow, or by two, three, four, or five swift arrows.
It stays firm, and plunges into battle. That's how a royal bull elephant
can endure touches.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? It's when a mendicant can
endure sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sights? It's when a mendicant,
seeing a sight with their eyes, is not aroused by a desirable sight, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sights.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure sounds? It's when a mendicant,
hearing a sound with their ears, is not aroused by desirable sounds, so
is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure sounds.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure smells? It's when a mendicant,
smelling an odor with their nose, is not aroused by a desirable smell,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure smells.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure tastes? It's when a mendicant,
tasting a flavor with their tongue, is not aroused by desirable tastes,
so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant can endure tastes.

And how is it that a mendicant can endure touches? It's when a
mendicant, feeling a touch with their body, is not aroused by a
desirable touch, so is able to still the mind. That's how a mendicant
can endure touches.

A mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated
to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation,
worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of
merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.140 A Listener  *Sotasutta*

"Mendicants, a royal bull elephant with five factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
five? A royal bull elephant listens, destroys, protects, endures, and
goes fast.

And how does a royal bull elephant listen? It's when a royal bull
elephant pays attention, applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly,
and actively listens to whatever task the elephant trainer has it do,
whether or not it has done it before. That's how a royal bull elephant
listens.

And how does a royal bull elephant destroy? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle destroys elephants with their riders, horses with
their riders, chariots and charioteers, and foot soldiers. That's how a
royal bull elephant destroys.

And how does a royal bull elephant protect? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle protects its fore-quarters and hind-quarters, its
fore-feet and hind-feet, and its head, ears, tusks, trunk, tail, and
rider. That's how a royal bull elephant protects.

And how does a royal bull elephant endure? It's when a royal bull
elephant in battle endures being struck by spears, swords, arrows, and
axes; it endures the thunder of the drums, kettledrums, horns, and
cymbals. That's how a royal bull elephant endures.

And how does a royal bull elephant go fast? It's when a royal bull
elephant swiftly goes in whatever direction the elephant trainer sends
it, whether or not it has been there before. That's how a royal bull
elephant goes fast.

A royal bull elephant with these five factors is worthy of a king, fit
to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What five? A mendicant listens, destroys,
protects, endures, and goes fast.

And how does a mendicant listen? It's when a mendicant pays attention,
applies the mind, concentrates wholeheartedly, and actively listens when
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One is being taught.
That's how a mendicant listens.

And how does a mendicant destroy? It's when a mendicant doesn't tolerate
a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought. They don't tolerate any bad,
unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, calm them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's how a
mendicant destroys.

And how does a mendicant protect? When a mendicant sees a sight with the
eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving
restraint over it. Hearing a sound with the ears ... Smelling an odor
with the nose ... Tasting a flavor with the tongue ... Feeling a touch
with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, they don't get caught
up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving restraint over it. That's
how a mendicant protects.

And how does a mendicant endure? It's when a mendicant endures cold,
heat, hunger, and thirst; the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles; rude and unwelcome criticism; and puts up with physical
pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. That's how a mendicant endures.

And how does a mendicant go fast? It's when a mendicant swiftly goes in
the direction they've never gone before in all this long time; that is,
the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments, the
ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment. That's how a
mendicant goes fast.

A mendicant with these five qualities ... is the supreme field of merit
for the world."

## The Chapter at Tikaṇḍakī

### N 5.141 Scorn  *Avajānātisutta*

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five? One
gives then scorns, one lives together then scorns, one is gullible for
gossip, one is impulsive, and one is dull and stupid.

And how does a person give then scorn? It's when a person gives someone
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. They
think: 'I give; this one receives.' They give to that person, then they
scorn them. That's how a person gives then scorns.

And how does a person live together then scorn? It's when a person lives
with someone else for two or three years. They live together with that
person, then they scorn them. That's how a person live together then
scorns.

And how is a person gullible for gossip? It's when they're very quick to
believe what a certain person says in praise or criticism of another.
That's how a person is gullible for gossip.

And how is a person impulsive? It's when a certain person is fickle in
faith, devotion, fondness, and confidence. That's how a person is
impulsive.

And how is a person dull and stupid? It's when they don't know the
difference between qualities that are skillful and unskillful,
blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those on the side
of dark and bright. That's how a person is dull and stupid.

These are the five people found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.142 Transgression  *Ārabhatisutta*

"Mendicants, these five people are found in the world. What five?

One person transgresses and regrets it. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad,
unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

One person transgresses and doesn't regret it. And they don't understand
...

One person doesn't transgress yet still feels regret. And they don't
understand ...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. But they don't understand
...

One person neither transgresses nor regrets. And they do understand
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

Take the case of the person who transgresses and regrets it. And they
don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.
They should be told: 'Venerable, the defilements born of transgression
are found in you, and the defilements born of regret grow. You would do
well to give up the defilements born of transgression and get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who transgresses and doesn't regret it. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are found in you, but the defilements
born of regret don't grow. You would do well to give up the defilements
born of transgression, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In this way
you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who doesn't transgress yet feels regret. And
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, yet the
defilements born of regret grow. You would do well to get rid of the
defilements born of regret, and then develop the mind and wisdom. In
this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

Take the case of the person who neither transgresses nor regrets. But
they don't understand... They should be told: 'Venerable, the
defilements born of transgression are not found in you, and the
defilements born of regret don't grow. You would do well to develop the
mind and wisdom. In this way you'll become just like the fifth person.'

And so, mendicants, when these four people are advised and instructed by
comparison with the fifth person, they gradually attain the ending of
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.143 At Sārandada  *Sārandadasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Vesālī for alms.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were sitting together at
the Sārandada shrine, and this discussion came up among
them, "The appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What five?
The elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the
woman-treasure, and the householder-treasure. The appearance of these
five treasures is rare in the world."

Then those Licchavis sent a man out on to the road, saying, "Mister,
please tell us when you see the Buddha."

That man saw the Buddha coming off in the distance. He went to the
Licchavis and said, "Sirs, the Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha is coming. Please go at your convenience."

Then those Licchavis went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side,
and said to him, "Please go to the Sārandada shrine, out of
sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then the Buddha went up to the Sārandada shrine, where he
sat on the seat spread out, and said to the Licchavis, "Licchavis, what
were you sitting talking about just now? What conversation was left
unfinished?"

"Well, Mister Gotama, this discussion came up among us while we were
sitting together: 'The appearance of five treasures is rare in the
world. ...'"

"You Licchavis are so fixated on sensual pleasures, that's the only
discussion that came up! Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is
rare in the world. What five?

The appearance of a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha.

A teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One.

A person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One.

A person who practices in line with the teaching.

A person who is grateful and thankful.

The appearance of these five treasures is rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.144 At Tikaṇḍakī  *Tikaṇḍakīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāketa, in
Tikaṇḍakī Wood. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

1.  "Mendicants, a mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time
    perceiving the following: the repulsive in the unrepulsive,

2.  the unrepulsive in the repulsive,

3.  the repulsive in both the unrepulsive and the repulsive, and

4.  the unrepulsive in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive.

5.  A mendicant would do well to meditate from time to time staying
    equanimous, mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the
    unrepulsive.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
the unrepulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for things that arouse
greed.' A mendicant should meditate perceiving the repulsive in the
unrepulsive for this reason.

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in the repulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for things that provoke
hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the repulsive in
both the unrepulsive and the repulsive? 'May greed not arise in me for
things that arouse greed. May hate not arise in me for things that
provoke hate.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate perceiving the unrepulsive
in both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May hate not arise in me for
things that provoke hate. May greed not arise in me for things that
arouse greed.' ...

For what reason should a mendicant meditate staying equanimous, mindful
and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive? 'May no
greed for things that arouse greed, hate for things that provoke hate,
or delusion for things that promote delusion arise in me in any way at
all.' For this reason a mendicant should meditate staying equanimous,
mindful and aware, rejecting both the repulsive and the unrepulsive."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.145 Hell  *Nirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is cast down to hell. What
five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie,
and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Someone with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with five qualities is raised up to heaven What five? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Someone with these five qualities is
raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.146 A Friend  *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has
five qualities. What five? They start up work projects. They take up
disciplinary issues. They conflict with leading mendicants. They like
long and aimless wandering. They're unable to educate, encourage, fire
up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma talk. Mendicants,
you shouldn't associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities.

You should associate with a mendicant friend who has five qualities.
What five? They don't start up work projects. They don't take up
disciplinary issues. They don't conflict with leading mendicants. They
don't like long and aimless wandering. They're able to educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire you from time to time with a Dhamma
talk. You should associate with a mendicant friend who has these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.147 Gifts of an Untrue Person  *Asappurisadānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five gifts of an untrue person. What five?
They give carelessly. They give thoughtlessly. They don't give with
their own hand. They give the dregs. They give without consideration for
consequences. These are the five gifts of an untrue person.

There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give
carefully. They give thoughtfully. They give with their own hand. They
don't give the dregs. They give with consideration for consequences.
These are the five gifts of a true person."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.148 Gifts of a True Person  *Sappurisadānasutta*

"There are these five gifts of a true person. What five? They give a
gift out of faith. They give a gift carefully. They give a gift at the
right time. They give a gift with no strings attached. They give a gift
without hurting themselves or others.

Having given a gift out of faith, in whatever place the result of that
gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And they're
attractive, good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty.

Having given a gift carefully, in whatever place the result of that gift
manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And their children,
wives, bondservants, servants, and workers want to listen. They actively
listen and try to understand.

Having given a gift at the right time, in whatever place the result of
that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy. And when
the time is right, they get all that they need.

Having given a gift with no strings attached, in whatever place the
result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and wealthy.
And their mind tends to enjoy the five refined kinds of sensual
stimulation.

Having given a gift without hurting themselves or others, in whatever
place the result of that gift manifests they become rich, affluent, and
wealthy. And no damage comes to their property from anywhere, whether
fire, flood, rulers, bandits, or unloved heirs.

These are the five gifts of a true person."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.149 Temporarily Free (1st)  *Paṭhamasamayavimuttasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company.
And they don't review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and
company. And they review the extent of their mind's freedom. These five
things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily
free."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.150 Temporarily Free (2nd)  *Dutiyasamayavimuttasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They relish work, talk, and sleep. They
don't guard the sense doors and they eat too much. These five things
lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily free.

These five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is
temporarily free. What five? They don't relish work, talk, and sleep.
They guard the sense doors and they have moderation in eating. These
five things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant who is temporarily
free."



## The Chapter on the True Teaching

### N 5.151 Surety in the Right Way (1st)  *Paṭhamasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They listen with scattered and disunified mind. They apply
the mind irrationally. Someone with these five qualities is unable to
enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when
listening to the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They listen
with unscattered and unified mind. They apply the mind rationally.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.152 Surety in the Right Way (2nd)  *Dutiyasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They disparage the talk, the speaker, or
themselves. They're witless, dull, and idiotic. They think they know
what they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to
enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities, even when
listening to the true teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't disparage the talk, the speaker, or themselves. They're wise,
bright, and clever. They don't think they know what they don't know.
Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.153 Surety in the Right Way (3rd)  *Tatiyasammattaniyāmasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with five qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What five? They listen to the teaching bent only on putting it
down. They listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind.
They're antagonistic to the teacher, planning to attack them. They're
witless, dull, and idiotic. And they think they know what they don't
know. Someone with these five qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with five qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What five?
They don't listen to the teaching bent only on putting it down. They
don't listen to the teaching with a hostile, fault-finding mind. They're
not antagonistic to the teacher, and not planning to attack them.
They're wise, bright, and clever. And they don't think they know what
they don't know. Someone with these five qualities is able to enter the
sure path with regards to skillful qualities when listening to the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.154 The Decline of the True Teaching (1st)  *Paṭhamasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants don't carefully
listen to the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They don't
carefully examine the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they
don't carefully practice in line with the meaning and the teaching
they've understood. These five things lead to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when mendicants carefully listen to
the teachings, memorize them, and remember them. They carefully examine
the meaning of teachings that they remember. And they carefully practice
in line with the meaning and the teaching they've understood. These five
things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.155 The Decline of the True Teaching (2nd)  *Dutiyasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants don't memorize the teaching---statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends,
stories of past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the
first thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants don't explain the teaching in detail to
others as they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't make others recite the teaching in
detail as they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants don't think about and consider the teaching
in their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize the teaching---statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of
past lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. This is the first thing
that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants explain the teaching in detail to others as
they learned and memorized it. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants make others recite the teaching in detail as
they learned and memorized it. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants recite the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants think about and consider the teaching in
their hearts, examining it with their minds as they learned and
memorized it. This is the fifth thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.156 The Decline of the True Teaching (3rd)  *Tatiyasaddhammasammosasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things lead to the decline and disappearance of
the true teaching. What five?

It's when the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned
incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. This is the first
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that
make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take
instruction respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---don't carefully make others recite the discourses. When they
pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to
preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in
backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are indulgent
and slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, there's a schism in the Saṅgha. When the
Saṅgha is split, they abuse, insult, block, and forsake
each other. This doesn't inspire confidence in those without it, and it
causes some with confidence to change their minds. This is the fifth
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

These five things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What five? It's when the mendicants memorize
discourses that have been learned correctly, with well placed words and
phrases. When the words and phrases are well organized, the meaning is
correctly interpreted. This is the first thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that
make them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This is the second thing ...

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---carefully make others recite the discourses. When they pass
away, the discourses aren't cut off at the root, and they have someone
to preserve them. This is the third thing ...

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent and slack, leaders
in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They rouse energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too are not
indulgent or slack ... This is the fourth thing ...

Furthermore, the Saṅgha lives comfortably, in harmony,
appreciating each other, without quarreling, with one recitation. When
the Saṅgha is in harmony, they don't abuse, insult, block,
or forsake each other. This inspires confidence in those without it, and
increases confidence in those who have it. This is the fifth thing that
leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

These five things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.157 Inappropriate Talk  *Dukkathāsutta*

"Mendicants, it is inappropriate to speak to five kinds of person by
comparing that person with someone else. What five?

It's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics. It's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning. It's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity. It's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith?
When an unfaithful person is spoken to about faith they lose their
temper, becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying
annoyance, hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that faith in
themselves, they don't get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unfaithful person about faith.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics?
When an unethical person is spoken to about ethics they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that ethical conduct in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings. That's
why it's inappropriate to talk to an unethical person about ethics.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about
learning? When an unlearned person is spoken to about learning they lose
their temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that learning in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to an unlearned person about learning.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity?
When a stingy person is spoken to about generosity they lose their
temper ... Why is that? Not seeing that generosity in themselves, they
don't get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a stingy person about generosity.

And why is it inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom?
When a witless person is spoken to about wisdom they lose their temper,
becoming annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, and displaying annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Not seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they don't get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
inappropriate to talk to a witless person about wisdom.

It is inappropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else.

It is appropriate to speak to five kinds of person by comparing that
person with someone else. What five?

It's appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith. It's
appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical conduct. It's
appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning. It's appropriate
to talk to a generous person about generosity. It's appropriate to talk
to a wise person about wisdom.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a faithful person about faith? When
a faithful person is spoken to about faith they don't lose their temper,
they don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that faith in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that faith brings. That's why it's appropriate
to talk to a faithful person about faith.

And why is it appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct? When an ethical person is spoken to about ethical conduct they
don't lose their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that ethical conduct in
themselves, they get the rapture and joy that ethical conduct brings.
That's why it's appropriate to talk to an ethical person about ethical
conduct.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a learned person about learning?
When a learned person is spoken to about learning they don't lose their
temper ... Why is that? Seeing that learning in themselves, they get the
rapture and joy that learning brings. That's why it's appropriate to
talk to a learned person about learning.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity?
When a generous person is spoken to about generosity they don't lose
their temper ... Why is that? Seeing that generosity in themselves, they
get the rapture and joy that generosity brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a generous person about generosity.

And why is it appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom? When a
wise person is spoken to about wisdom they don't lose their temper, they
don't get annoyed, hostile, and hard-hearted, or display annoyance,
hate, and bitterness. Why is that? Seeing that wisdom in themselves,
they get the rapture and joy that wisdom brings. That's why it's
appropriate to talk to a wise person about wisdom.

It is appropriate to speak to these five kinds of person by comparing
that person with someone else."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.158 Timidity  *Sārajjasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with five qualities is overcome by timidity.
What five? It's when a mendicant is faithless, unethical, with little
learning, lazy, and witless. A mendicant with these five qualities is
overcome by timidity.

A mendicant with five qualities is self-assured. What five? It's when a
mendicant is faithful, ethical, learned, energetic, and wise. A
mendicant with these five qualities is self-assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.159 With Udāyī  *Udāyīsutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Now, at that time
Venerable Udāyī was sitting teaching Dhamma, surrounded by
a large assembly of laypeople. Seeing this, Venerable Ānanda went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Udāyī is teaching Dhamma, surrounded by a
large assembly of laypeople."

"Ānanda, it's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish
five things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others. What five?

You should teach Dhamma to others thinking: 'I will teach step by step.'
...

'I will teach showing my method.' ...

'I will teach out of kindness.' ...

'I will not teach while secretly hoping to profit.' ...

'I will teach without hurting myself or others.'

It's not easy to teach Dhamma to others. You should establish these five
things in yourself before teaching Dhamma to others."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.160 Hard to Get Rid Of  *Duppaṭivinodayasutta*

"Mendicants, these five things are hard to get rid of once they've
arisen. What five? Greed, hate, delusion, the feeling of being inspired
to speak out, and thoughts of traveling. These five things are hard to
get rid of once they've arisen."

## The Chapter on Resentment

### N 5.161 Getting Rid of Resentment (1st)  *Paṭhamaāghātapaṭivinayasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

You should develop love for a person you resent. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

You should develop compassion for a person you resent. ...

You should develop equanimity for a person you resent. ...

You should disregard a person you resent, paying no attention to them.
...

You should focus on the ownership of deeds regarding that person: 'This
venerable is the owner of their deeds and heir to their deeds. Deeds are
their womb, their relative, and their refuge. They shall be the heir of
whatever deeds they do, whether good or bad.' That's how to get rid of
resentment for that person.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.162 Getting Rid of Resentment (2nd)  *Dutiyaāghātapaṭivinayasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, a mendicant should use these five methods to completely get
rid of resentment when it has arisen toward anyone. What five?

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body is impure, but
whose behavior by way of speech is pure, you should get rid of
resentment for that kind of person.

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of speech is impure, but
whose behavior by way of body is pure, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
impure, and who doesn't get an openness and clarity of heart from time
to time, ...

In the case of a person whose behavior by way of body and speech is
pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of heart from time to time,
you should get rid of resentment for that kind of person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body is impure, but whose behavior by way of speech is pure? Suppose
a mendicant wearing rag robes sees a rag by the side of the road. They'd
hold it down with the left foot, spread it out with the right foot, tear
out what was intact, and take it away with them. In the same way, at
that time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of body
and focus on their pure behavior by way of speech. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of speech is impure, but whose behavior by way of body is pure? Suppose
there was a lotus pond covered with moss and aquatic plants. Then along
comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and
parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond, sweep apart the moss and
aquatic plants, drink from their cupped hands, and be on their way. In
the same way, at that time you should ignore that person's impure
behavior by way of speech and focus on their pure behavior by way of
body. That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, but who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a little water in a cow's
hoofprint. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They might think: 'This little bit of water
is in a cow's hoofprint. If I drink it with my cupped hands or a bowl,
I'll stir it and disturb it, making it undrinkable. Why don't I get down
on all fours and drink it up like a cow, then be on my way?' So that's
what they do. In the same way, at that time you should ignore that
person's impure behavior by way of speech and body, and focus on the
fact that they get an openness and clarity of heart from time to time.
That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is impure, and who doesn't get an openness and
clarity of heart from time to time? Suppose a person was traveling along
a road, and they were sick, suffering, gravely ill. And it was a long
way to a village, whether ahead or behind. And they didn't have any
suitable food or medicine, or a competent carer, or someone to bring
them within a village. Another person traveling along the road might see
them, and think of them with nothing but sympathy, kindness, and
sympathy: 'Oh, may this person get suitable food or medicine, or a
competent carer, or someone to bring them within a village. Why is that?
So that they don't come to ruin right here.' In the same way, at that
time you should ignore that person's impure behavior by way of speech
and body, and the fact that they don't get an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time, and think of them with nothing but compassion,
kindness, and sympathy: 'Oh, may this person give up bad conduct by way
of body, speech, and mind, and develop good conduct by way of body,
speech, and mind. Why is that? So that, when their body breaks up, after
death, they're not reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.' That's how to get rid of resentment for that person.

How should you get rid of resentment for a person whose behavior by way
of body and speech is pure, and who gets an openness and clarity of
heart from time to time? Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear,
sweet, cool water, clean, with smooth banks, delightful, and shaded by
many trees. Then along comes a person struggling in the oppressive heat,
weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the lotus pond to bathe
and drink. And after emerging they'd sit or lie down right there in the
shade of the trees.

In the same way, at that time you should focus on that person's pure
behavior by way of body and speech, and on the fact that they get an
openness and clarity of heart from time to time. That's how to get rid
of resentment for that person. Relying on a person who is impressive all
around, the mind becomes confident.

A mendicant should use these five methods to completely get rid of
resentment when it has arisen toward anyone."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.163 Discussions  *Sākacchasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to hold a discussion with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.164 Sharing a Way of Life  *Sājīvasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"A mendicant with five qualities is fit to share their life with their
spiritual companions. What five?

A mendicant is personally accomplished in ethics, and answers questions
that come up when discussing accomplishment in ethics.

They're personally accomplished in immersion, ...

They're personally accomplished in wisdom, ...

They're personally accomplished in freedom, ...

They're personally accomplished in the knowledge and vision of freedom,
and they answer questions that come up when discussing accomplishment in
the knowledge and vision of freedom.

A mendicant with these five qualities is fit to share their life with
their spiritual companions."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.165 Asking Questions  *Pañhapucchāsutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: ...
"Whoever asks a question of another, does so for one or other of these
five reasons. What five? Someone asks a question of another from
stupidity and folly. Or they ask from corrupt wishes, being of wishful
temperament. Or they ask in order to disparage. Or they ask wanting to
understand. Or they ask with the thought, 'If they correctly answer the
question I ask it's good. If not, I'll correctly answer it for them.'
Whoever asks a question of another, does so for one or other of these
five reasons. As for myself, I ask with the thought, 'If they correctly
answer the question I ask it's good. If not, I'll correctly answer it
for them.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.166 Cessation  *Nirodhasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, then, surpassing the company of gods
that consume solid food, they're reborn in a certain host of mind-made
gods. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Venerable Udāyī said to him, "This is
not possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated
his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Venerable
Udāyī disagrees with me three times, and not one mendicant
agrees with me. Why don't I go to see the Buddha?"

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to the mendicants:

"Reverends, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. There is such a possibility. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

When he said this, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

But for a second ... and a third time Sāriputta repeated
his statement.

And for a third time, Udāyī said to him, "This is not
possible, Reverend Sāriputta, it cannot happen!"

Then Venerable Sāriputta thought, "Even in front of the
Buddha Venerable Udāyī disagrees with me three times, and
not one mendicant agrees with me. I'd better stay silent." Then
Sāriputta fell silent.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Udāyī, "But
Udāyī, do you believe in a mind-made body?"

"For those gods, sir, who are formless, made of perception."

"Udāyī, what has an incompetent fool like you got to say?
How on earth could you imagine you've got something worth saying!"

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda, "Ānanda! How can you just
watch while a senior mendicant is being harassed? Don't you have any
compassion for a senior mendicant who is being harassed?"

Then the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, take a mendicant who is accomplished in ethics, immersion,
and wisdom. They might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible. If they don't reach
enlightenment in this very life, they're reborn in the company of a
certain host of mind-made gods, who surpass the gods that consume solid
food. There they might enter into and emerge from the cessation of
perception and feeling. That is possible."

That is what the Buddha said. When he had spoken, the Holy One got up
from his seat and entered his dwelling.

Then, not long after the Buddha had left, Venerable Ānanda went to
Venerable Upavāna and said to him, "Reverend
Upavāna, they've been harassing other senior mendicants,
but I didn't question them. I wouldn't be surprised if the Buddha brings
this up when he comes out of retreat later this afternoon. He might even
call upon Venerable Upavāna himself. And right now I feel
timid."

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the assembly hall, where he sat on the seat spread out, and said to
Upavāna, "Upavāna, how many qualities should a
senior mendicant have to be dear and beloved to their spiritual
companions, respected and admired?"

"Sir, a senior mendicant with five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

"Good, good, Upavāna! A senior mendicant with these five
qualities is dear and beloved to their spiritual companions, respected
and admired. If these five qualities are not found in a senior
mendicant, why would their spiritual companions honor, respect, revere,
or venerate them? Because of their broken teeth, gray hair, and wrinkled
skin? But since these five qualities are found in a senior mendicant,
their spiritual companions honor, respect, revere, or venerate them."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.167 Accusation  *Codanāsutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, a
mendicant who wants to accuse another should first establish five things
in themselves.

What five? I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong time. I will
speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not harshly. I will
speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak lovingly, not from
secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first
establish these five things in themselves.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the wrong
time, not being disturbed at the right time. They're accused falsely,
not disturbed truthfully. They're accused harshly, not disturbed gently.
They're accused harmfully, not disturbed beneficially. They're accused
with secret hate, not disturbed lovingly.

The mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in five
ways. 'Venerable, you were accused at the wrong time, not at the right
time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You were accused falsely,
not truthfully. ... You were accused harshly, not gently. ... You were
accused harmfully, not beneficially. ... You were accused with secret
hate, not lovingly. There's no need for you to feel remorse.' A
mendicant who is accused improperly should be reassured in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes improper accusations should be chastened in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the wrong time, not at the
right time. There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation falsely, not truthfully. ... You made an accusation harshly,
not gently. ... You made an accusation harmfully, not beneficially. ...
You made an accusation with secret hate, not lovingly. There's a reason
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes improper accusations
should be chastened in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant wouldn't think to make a false accusation.

Take a case where I see a certain person being accused at the right
time, not being disturbed at the wrong time. They're accused truthfully,
not disturbed falsely. They're accused gently, not disturbed harshly.
They're accused beneficially, not disturbed harmfully. They're accused
lovingly, not disturbed with secret hate.

The mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in five ways.
'Venerable, you were accused at the right time, not at the wrong time.
There's a reason for you to feel remorse. You were accused truthfully,
not falsely. ... You were accused gently, not harshly. ... You were
accused beneficially, not harmfully. ... You were accused lovingly, not
with secret hate. There's a reason for you to feel remorse.' The
mendicant who is accused properly should be chastened in these five
ways.

The mendicant who makes proper accusations should be reassured in five
ways. 'Reverend, you made an accusation at the right time, not at the
wrong time. There's no need for you to feel remorse. You made an
accusation truthfully, not falsely. ... You made an accusation gently,
not harshly. ... You made an accusation beneficially, not harmfully. ...
You made an accusation lovingly, not with secret hate. There's no need
for you to feel remorse.' The mendicant who makes proper accusations
should be reassured in these five ways. Why is that? So that another
mendicant would think to make a true accusation.

A person who is accused should ground themselves in two things: truth
and an even temper. Even if others accuse me---at the right time or the
wrong time, truthfully or falsely, gently or harshly, beneficially or
harmfully, lovingly or with secret hate---I will still ground myself in
two things: truth and an even temper. If I know that that quality is
found in me, I will tell them that it is. If I know that that quality is
not found in me, I will tell them that it is not."

"Even when you speak like this, Sāriputta, there are still
some silly people here who do not respectfully take it up."

"Sir, there are those faithless people who went forth from the lay life
to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood. They're
devious, deceitful, and sneaky. They're restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, and loose-tongued. They do not guard their sense doors or
eat in moderation, and they are not dedicated to wakefulness. They don't
care about the ascetic life, and don't keenly respect the training.
They're indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting
seclusion, lazy, and lacking energy. They're unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying minds, witless and
idiotic. When I speak to them like this, they don't respectfully take it
up.

Sir, there are those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to
homelessness out of faith. They're not devious, deceitful, and sneaky.
They're not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, and loose-tongued.
They guard their sense doors and eat in moderation, and they are
dedicated to wakefulness. They care about the ascetic life, and keenly
respect the training. They're not indulgent or slack, nor are they
leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion. They're energetic and
determined. They're mindful, with situational awareness, immersion, and
unified minds; wise and clever. When I speak to them like this, they do
respectfully take it up."

"Sāriputta, those faithless people who went forth from the
lay life to homelessness not out of faith but to earn a livelihood ...
Leave them be.

But those gentlemen who went forth from the lay life to homelessness out
of faith ... You should speak to them. Sāriputta, you
should advise your spiritual companions! You should instruct your
spiritual companions! Thinking: 'I will draw my spiritual companions
away from false teachings and ground them in true teachings.' That's how
you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.168 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

There Venerable Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Reverends, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness. In the
same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a
vital condition for right immersion.

When there is right immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has
fulfilled a vital condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is
true knowledge and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and
vision has fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and
dispassion. When there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has
fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.169 Quick-witted  *Khippanisantisutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to him:

"Reverend Sāriputta, how are we to define a mendicant who
is quick-witted when it comes to skillful teachings, who learns well,
learns much, and does not forget what they've learned?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and apply your mind
well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied. Venerable Ānanda said
this:

"It's when a mendicant is skilled in the meaning, skilled in the
teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled in
sequence. That is how to define a mendicant who is quick-witted when it
comes to skillful teachings, who learns well, learns much, and does not
forget what they've learned."

"It's incredible, it's amazing! How well this was said by Venerable
Ānanda! And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who has these
five qualities: 'Reverend Ānanda is skilled in the meaning, skilled in
the teaching, skilled in terminology, skilled in phrasing, and skilled
in sequence.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 5.170 With Bhaddaji  *Bhaddajisutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then Venerable Bhaddaji went up to Venerable
Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side, and Venerable Ānanda
said to him:

"Reverend Bhaddaji, what is the best sight, the best sound, the best
happiness, the best perception, and the best state of existence?"

"Reverend, there is this Divinity, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the
universal seer, the wielder of power. When you see the Divinity, that's
the best sight. There are the gods called 'of streaming radiance', who
are drenched and steeped in pleasure. Every so often they feel inspired
to exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what bliss!' When you hear that, it's
the best sound. There are the gods called 'of universal beauty'. Since
they're truly content, they experience pleasure. This is the best
happiness. There are the gods reborn in the dimension of nothingness.
This is the best perception. There are the gods reborn in the dimension
of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the best state of
existence."

"So, Venerable Bhaddaji, do you agree with what most people say about
this?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Bhaddaji, listen and apply your mind well, I will
speak."

"Yes, reverend," Bhaddaji replied. Ānanda said this:

"What you see when the defilements end in the present life is the best
sight. What you hear when the defilements end in the present life is the
best sound. The happiness you feel when the defilements end in the
present life is the best happiness. What you perceive when the
defilements end in the present life is the best perception. The state of
existence in which the defilements end in the present life is the best
state of existence."

## The Chapter on a Lay Follower

### N 5.171 Timidity  *Sārajjasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"A lay follower with five qualities is overcome by timidity. What five?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay follower with these
five qualities is overcome by timidity.

A lay follower with five qualities is self-assured. What five? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay follower with these
five qualities is self-assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.172 Assured  *Visāradasutta*

"A lay follower living at home with five qualities is not self-assured.
What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay follower
living at home with these five qualities is not self-assured.

A lay follower living at home with these five qualities is self-assured.
What five? They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual
misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay
follower living at home with these five qualities is self-assured."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.173 Hell  *Nirayasutta*

"Mendicants, a lay follower with five qualities is cast down to hell.
What five? They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct,
lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay follower with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A lay follower with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five?
They don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie,
or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. A lay follower with these
five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.174 Threats  *Verasutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, unless these five dangers and threats are given up, one is
said to be unethical, and is reborn in hell. What five? Killing living
creatures, stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and consuming
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. Unless these five dangers and
threats are given up, one is said to be unethical, and is reborn in
hell.

Once these five dangers and threats are given up, one is said to be
ethical, and is reborn in heaven. What five? Killing living creatures,
stealing, committing sexual misconduct, lying, and consuming beer, wine,
and liquor intoxicants. Once these five dangers and threats are given
up, one is said to be ethical, and is reborn in heaven.

Anyone who kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in
this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness.
Anyone who refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and
threats either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience
mental pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone
who refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ...

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ...

Anyone who lies ...

Anyone who consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants creates dangers
and threats both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences
mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from consuming beer, wine,
and liquor intoxicants creates no dangers and threats either in this
life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental pain and
sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains
from consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.

> Take anyone in this world\
> who kills living creatures,\
> speaks falsely, steals,\
> commits adultery,\
> and indulges in drinking\
> beer and wine.
>
> Unless they give up these five threats,\
> they're said to be unethical.\
> When their body breaks up, that witless person\
> is reborn in hell.
>
> A person in the world doesn't kill living creatures,\
> speak falsely,\
> steal,\
> commit adultery,\
> or indulge in drinking\
> beer and wine.
>
> Giving up these five threats,\
> they're said to be ethical.\
> When their body breaks up, that wise person\
> is reborn in a good place."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.175 Corpse-worker  *Caṇḍālasutta*

"Mendicants, a lay follower with five qualities is a corpse-worker, a
stain, and a reject among lay followers. What five? They're faithless.
They're unethical. They follow boisterous, superstitious rites,
believing in omens rather than deeds. They seek outside of the Buddhist
community for those worthy of religious donations. And they make
offerings there first. A lay follower with these five qualities is a
corpse-worker, a stain, and a reject among lay followers.

A lay follower with five qualities is a gem, a pink lotus, and a white
lotus among lay followers. What five? They're faithful. They're ethical.
They don't practice boisterous, superstitious rites, and believe in
deeds rather than omens. They don't seek outside of the Buddhist
community for those worthy of religious donations. And they don't make
offerings there first. A lay follower with these five qualities is a
gem, a pink lotus, and a white lotus among lay followers."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.176 Rapture  *Pītisutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, escorted by around five
hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householders, you have supplied the mendicant Saṅgha with
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. But
you should not be content with just this much. So you should train like
this: 'How can we, from time to time, enter and dwell in the rapture of
seclusion?' That's how you should train."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha,
"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well said this was by the
Buddha: 'Householders, you have supplied the mendicant
Saṅgha with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. But you should not be content with just this
much. So you should train like this: "How can we, from time to time,
enter and dwell in the rapture of seclusion?" That's how you should
train.'

At a time when a noble disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of
seclusion, five things aren't present in him. The pain and sadness
connected with sensual pleasures. The pleasure and happiness connected
with sensual pleasures. The pain and sadness connected with the
unskillful. The pleasure and happiness connected with the unskillful.
The pain and sadness connected with the skillful. At a time when a noble
disciple enters and dwells in the rapture of seclusion, these five
things aren't present in him."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! At a time when a noble disciple
enters and dwells in the rapture of seclusion, five things aren't
present in him. The pain and sadness connected with sensual pleasures.
The pleasure and happiness connected with sensual pleasures. The pain
and sadness connected with the unskillful. The pleasure and happiness
connected with the unskillful. The pain and sadness connected with the
skillful. At a time when a noble disciple enters and dwells in the
rapture of seclusion, these five things aren't present in him."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.177 Trades  *Vaṇijjāsutta*

"Mendicants, a lay follower should not engage in these five trades. What
five? Trade in weapons, living creatures, meat, intoxicants, and
poisons. A lay follower should not engage in these five trades."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.178 Kings  *Rājāsutta*

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up killing living creatures, and the kings have them
arrested for that, and execute, imprison, or banish them, or do what the
case requires?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person has
murdered a man or a woman.' The kings have them arrested for killing,
and execute, imprison, or banish them, or do what the case requires.
Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up stealing, and the kings have them arrested for that
...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person took
something from a village or wilderness, with the intention to commit
theft.' The kings have them arrested for stealing ... Have you ever seen
or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up sexual misconduct, and the kings have them arrested for
that ...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person had
sexual relations with women or maidens under someone else's protection.'
The kings have them arrested for that ... Have you ever seen or heard of
such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up lying, and the kings have them arrested for that ...?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'This person has
ruined a householder or householder's child by lying.' The kings have
them arrested for that ... Have you ever seen or heard of such a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a person
who has given up beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants, and the kings have
them arrested for that, and execute, imprison, or banish them, or do
what the case requires?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.
Rather, the kings are informed of someone's bad deed: 'While under the
influence of beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants, this person murdered a
woman or a man. Or they stole something from a village or wilderness. Or
they had sexual relations with women or maidens under someone else's
protection. Or they ruined a householder or householder's child by
lying.' The kings have them arrested for being under the influence of
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants, and execute, imprison, or banish
them, or do what the case requires. Have you ever seen or heard of such
a case?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.179 A Layperson  *Gihisutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika, escorted by around five
hundred lay followers, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

"You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed
laypeople whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get
four blissful meditations in this life belonging to the higher mind when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

And what are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained?
It's when a noble disciple doesn't kill living creatures, steal, commit
sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.
These are the five precepts in which their actions are restrained.

And what are the four blissful meditations in this life belonging to the
higher mind that they get when they want, without trouble or difficulty?

It's when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
This is the first blissful meditation in this life belonging to the
higher mind, which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified mind
and cleanse the unclean mind.

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' This is the second
blissful meditation ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the
Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples
is practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' This is the third blissful
meditation ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This is the
fourth blissful meditation in this life belonging to the higher mind,
which they achieve in order to purify the unpurified mind and cleanse
the unclean mind. These are the four blissful meditations in this life
belonging to the higher mind that they get when they want, without
trouble or difficulty.

You should know this, Sāriputta, about those white-clothed
laypeople whose actions are restrained in the five precepts, and who get
four blissful meditations in this life belonging to the higher mind when
they want, without trouble or difficulty. They may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

> Seeing the peril in the hells,\
> you should shun bad deeds.\
> Taking up the teaching of the noble ones,\
> an astute person should shun them.
>
> You shouldn't harm living beings,\
> so long as strength is found.\
> Nor should you knowingly speak falsehood,\
> or take what is not given.
>
> Content with your own partners,\
> you should stay away from the partners of others.\
> A man shouldn't drink wine or toddy,\
> as they confuse the mind.
>
> You should recollect the Buddha,\
> and reflect on the teaching.\
> You should develop a harmless mind of welfare,\
> which leads to the realms of gods.
>
> When suitable gifts to give are available\
> to someone who seeks and needs merit,\
> a religious donation is abundant\
> if given first to the peaceful ones.
>
> I will tell of the peaceful ones,\
> Sāriputta, listen to me.\
> Cows may be black or white,\
> red or tawny,
>
> mottled or uniform,\
> or pigeon-colored.\
> But when one is born among them,\
> the bull that's tamed---
>
> a behemoth, powerful,\
> well-paced in pulling forward---\
> they yoke the load just to him,\
> regardless of his color.
>
> So it is for humans,\
> wherever they may be born---\
> among aristocrats, brahmins, peasants,\
> menials, or corpse-workers and scavengers---
>
> but when one is born among them,\
> tamed, true to their vows.\
> Firm in principle, accomplished in ethical conduct,\
> truthful, conscientious,
>
> they've given up birth and death,\
> and have completed the spiritual journey.\
> With burden put down, detached,\
> they've completed the task\
> \>and are free of defilements.
>
> Gone beyond all things,\
> they're quenched by not grasping.\
> In that flawless field,\
> a religious donation is abundant.
>
> Fools who don't understand---\
> unlearned simpletons---\
> give their gifts to those outside,\
> and don't attend the peaceful ones.
>
> But those who do attend the peaceful ones---\
> wise, esteemed as attentive---\
> and whose faith in the Holy One\
> has roots planted deep,
>
> they go to the realm of the gods,\
> or are born here in a good family.\
> Gradually those astute ones\
> reach extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.180 About Gavesī  *Gavesīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. While traveling
along a road the Buddha saw a large sal grove in a certain spot. He left
the road, went to the sal grove, and plunged deep into it. And at a
certain spot he smiled.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "What is the cause, what is the reason
why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

So Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "What is the cause, what is the
reason why the Buddha smiled? Realized Ones do not smile for no reason."

"Once upon a time, Ānanda, there was a city in this spot that was
successful and prosperous, populous, full of people. And Kassapa, a
blessed one, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha, lived supported
by that city.

He had a lay follower called Gavesī who had not fulfilled
all the precepts. And the five hundred lay followers who were taught and
advised by Gavesī also had not fulfilled all the precepts.
Then Gavesī thought: 'I'm the helper, leader, and adviser
of these five hundred lay followers, yet neither I nor they have
fulfilled the precepts. We're the same, I'm in no way better. So let me
do better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and
said to them: 'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one
who has fulfilled the precepts.' Then those five hundred lay followers
thought: 'Master Gavesī is our helper, leader, and adviser,
and now he will fulfill the precepts. Why don't we do the same?' Then
those five hundred lay followers went to Gavesī and said to
him: 'From this day forth may Master Gavesī remember these
five hundred lay followers as having fulfilled the precepts.'

Then Gavesī thought: 'I'm the helper, leader, and adviser
of these five hundred lay followers, and both I and they have fulfilled
the precepts. We're the same, I'm in no way better. So let me do
better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and
said to them: 'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one
who is celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex.' Then those
five hundred lay followers did the same. ...

Then Gavesī thought: 'These five hundred lay followers ...
are celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of sex. We're the same,
I'm in no way better. So let me do better.'

Then Gavesī went to those five hundred lay followers and
said to them: 'From this day forth may the venerables remember me as one
who eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and
from food at the wrong time.' Then those five hundred lay followers did
the same. ...

Then Gavesī thought: 'These five hundred lay followers ...
eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night, and food at
the wrong time. We're the same, I'm in no way better. So let me do
better.'

Then the lay follower Gavesī went up to the blessed one
Kassapa, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha and said to him:
'Sir, may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's
presence?' And he received the going forth, the ordination in the
Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, the mendicant
Gavesī, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: 'Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place.' And the mendicant Gavesī became one of the
perfected.

Then those five hundred lay followers thought: 'Master
Gavesī is our helper, leader, and adviser, He has shaved
off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and gone forth from the
lay life to homelessness. Why don't we do the same?' Then those five
hundred lay followers went up to the blessed one Kassapa, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha and said to him: 'Sir, may we receive the
going forth and ordination in the Buddha's presence?' And they did
receive the going forth and ordination in the Buddha's presence.

Then the mendicant Gavesī thought: 'I get the supreme bliss
of freedom whenever I want, without trouble or difficulty. Oh, may these
five hundred mendicants do the same!' Then those five hundred
mendicants, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon
realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very
life. They lived having achieved with their own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

They understood: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

And so, Ānanda, those five hundred mendicants headed by
Gavesī, trying to go higher and higher, better and better,
realized the supreme bliss of freedom. So you should train like this:
'Trying to go higher and higher, better and better, we will realize the
supreme bliss of freedom.' That's how you should train."

## The Chapter on Wilderness Dwellers

### N 5.181 Wilderness Dwellers  *Āraññikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of wilderness dwellers. What
five? A person may be wilderness dweller because of stupidity and folly.
Or because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because
of madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas
and their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake
of contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are
the five kinds of wilderness dwellers. But the person who dwells in the
wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the foremost, best,
chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
dwells in the wilderness for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.182 Robes  *Cīvarasutta*

"Mendicants, these five wear rag robes. What five? A person may wear rag
robes because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it
is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake of having few wishes ...
These are the five who wear rag robes."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.183 Dwelling at the Root of a Tree  *Rukkhamūlikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five who dwell at the root of a tree. What
five? A person may dwell at the root of a tree because of stupidity ...
corrupt wishes ... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ...
or for the sake of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell at
the root of a tree."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.184 Charnel Ground Dwellers  *Sosānikasutta*

"Mendicants, these five dwell in a charnel ground. What five? A person
may dwell in a charnel ground because of stupidity ... corrupt wishes
... madness ... because it is praised by the Buddhas ... or for the sake
of having few wishes ... These are the five who dwell in a charnel
ground."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.185 Open Air Dwellers  *Abbhokāsikasutta*

"These five dwell in the open air. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.186 Those Who Never Lie Down  *Nesajjikasutta*

"These five never lie down. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.187 Those Who Sleep Wherever a Mat is Laid  *Yathāsanthatikasutta*

"These five sleep wherever they lay their mat. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.188 Those Who Eat in One Sitting  *Ekāsanikasutta*

"These five eat in one sitting per day. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.189 Refusers of Late Food  *Khalupacchābhattikasutta*

"These five refuse to accept food offered after the meal has begun. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.190 Those Who Eat Only From the Almsbowl  *Pattapiṇḍikasutta*

"Mendicants, these five eat only from the almsbowl. What five? A person
may eat only from the almsbowl because of stupidity and folly. Or
because of corrupt wishes, being of wishful temperament. Or because of
madness and mental disorder. Or because it is praised by the Buddhas and
their disciples. Or for the sake of having few wishes, for the sake of
contentment, self-effacement, seclusion, and simplicity. These are the
five kinds of people who eat only from the almsbowl. But the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these. In the same way, the person who
eats only from the almsbowl for the sake of having few wishes is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the five."

## The Chapter on Brahmins

### N 5.191 Dogs  *Soṇasutta*

"Mendicants, these five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited
these days among dogs, but not among brahmins. What five?

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women, not with others.
These days brahmins have sex with both brahmin women and others. But
these days dogs have sex only with female dogs, not with other species.
This is the first ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins had sex only with brahmin women in the fertile
phase of the menstrual cycle, not at other times. These days brahmins
have sex with brahmin women both in the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle and at other times. But these days dogs have sex only with female
dogs when they are in heat, not at other times. This is the second
ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but
not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins neither bought nor sold brahmin women. They lived
together because they loved each other and wanted their family line to
continue. These days brahmins both buy and sell brahmin women. They live
together whether they love each other or not and they want their family
line to continue. But these days dogs neither buy nor sell female dogs.
They live together because they're attracted to each other and want
their family line to continue. This is the third ancient tradition of
the brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins did not store up money, grain, silver, or gold.
These days brahmins do store up money, grain, silver, and gold. But
these days dogs don't store up money, grain, silver, or gold. This is
the fourth ancient tradition of the brahmins exhibited these days among
dogs, but not among brahmins.

In the past brahmins went looking for almsfood for dinner in the
evening, and for breakfast in the morning. These days brahmins eat as
much as they like until their bellies are full, then take away the
leftovers. But these days dogs go looking for dinner in the evening, and
for breakfast in the morning. This is the fifth ancient tradition of the
brahmins exhibited these days among dogs, but not among brahmins.

These five ancient traditions of the brahmins are exhibited these days
among dogs, but not among brahmins."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.192 With the Brahmin Doṇa  *Doṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

Then Doṇa the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, Doṇa sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard that the ascetic Gotama doesn't bow to old
brahmins, the elderly and senior, who are advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their presence or
offer them a seat. And this is indeed the case, for Mister Gotama does
not bow to old brahmins, elderly and senior, who are advanced in years
and have reached the final stage of life; nor does he rise in their
presence or offer them a seat. This is not appropriate, Mister Gotama."

"Doṇa, do you too claim to be a brahmin?"

"Mister Gotama, if anyone should be rightly called a brahmin, it's me.
For I am well born on both my mother's and father's side, of pure
descent, with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy back to the seventh
paternal generation. I recite and remember the hymns, and have mastered
the three Vedas, together with their vocabularies and ritual
performance, their phonology and word classification, and the testaments
as fifth. I know them word-by-word, and their grammar. I am well versed
in cosmology and the marks of a great man."

"Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta,
Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja,
Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. They were the authors and
propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal was sung and propagated and
compiled in ancient times. These days, brahmins continue to sing and
chant it. They continue chanting what was chanted, reciting what was
recited, and teaching what was taught. Those seers described five kinds
of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to the Divinity, one who is equal to
a god, one who toes the line, one who crosses the line, and the fifth is
a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of these are you, Doṇa?"

"Mister Gotama, we don't know about these five kinds of brahmins. We
just know the word 'brahmin'. Mister Gotama, please teach me this matter
so I can learn about these five brahmins."

"Well then, brahmin, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes sir," Doṇa replied. The Buddha said this:

"Doṇa, how is a brahmin equal to the Divinity?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the boy's spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a fee
for his tutor, but only by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by farming,
trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of the
professions, but solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms bowl.
Having offered the fee to his tutor, he shaves off his hair and beard,
dresses in ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness.

Then they meditate spreading a heart full of love to one direction, and
to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way
above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full
of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion
... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to
the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will. Having developed these four divine meditations, when the body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a realm of
divinity.

That's how a brahmin is equal to the Divinity.

And how is a brahmin equal to a god?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ... Having offered the fee to his tutor, he seeks a wife, but only
by legitimate means, not illegitimate.

In this context, Doṇa, what is legitimate? Not by buying or
selling, he only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has
sex only with a brahmin woman. He does not have sex with a woman from a
family of aristocrats, peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters,
bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, or scavengers. Nor does he have sex with
women who are pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of
the menstrual cycle.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a pregnant woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a pregnant woman, the boy or girl would be born in
too much filth. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a pregnant
woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex with a breastfeeding woman? If a
brahmin had sex with a breastfeeding woman, the boy or girl would drink
back the semen. That's why the brahmin doesn't have sex with a
breastfeeding woman.

And why does the brahmin not have sex outside the fertile phase of the
menstrual cycle? Because his brahmin wife is not there for sensual
pleasure, fun, and enjoyment, but only for procreation. Having ensured
his progeny through sex, he shaves off his hair and beard, dresses in
ocher robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness.

When he has gone forth, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, he enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption. Having
developed these four absorptions, when the body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

That's how a brahmin is equal to god.

And how does a brahmin toe the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Not by buying or selling, he only accepts a brahmin woman by the pouring
of water. Having ensured his progeny through sex, his child makes him
happy. Because of this attachment he stays in his family property, and
does not go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he doesn't cross
over it. That's why he's called a brahmin who toes the line.

That's how a brahmin toes the line.

And how does a brahmin cross the line?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides ...

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

As far as the line of the ancient brahmins extends, he crosses over it.
That's why he's called a brahmin who crosses the line.

That's how a brahmin crosses the line.

And how is a brahmin a brahmin corpse-worker?

It's when a brahmin is well born on both the mother's and the father's
sides, coming from a clean womb back to the seventh paternal generation,
with irrefutable and impeccable genealogy. For forty-eight years he
leads the virginal spiritual life studying the hymns. Then he seeks a
fee for his tutor by legitimate means and illegitimate means. By
farming, trade, raising cattle, archery, government service, or one of
the professions, not solely by living on alms, not scorning the alms
bowl.

Having offered a fee for his tutor, he seeks a wife by both legitimate
and illegitimate means. That is, by buying or selling, as well as
accepting a brahmin woman by the pouring of water. He has sex with a
brahmin woman, as well as with a woman from a family of aristocrats,
peasants, menials, corpse-workers, hunters, bamboo workers,
chariot-makers, or scavengers. And he has sex with women who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or outside the fertile phase of the menstrual
cycle. His brahmin wife is there for sensual pleasure, fun, and
enjoyment, as well as for procreation.

He earns a living by any kind of work. The brahmins say to him, 'My good
man, why is it that you claim to be a brahmin, but you earn a living by
any kind of work?'

He says, 'It's like a fire that burns both pure and filthy things, but
doesn't become corrupted by them. In the same way, my good man, if a
brahmin earns a living by any kind of work, he is not corrupted by
that.'

A brahmin is called a brahmin corpse-worker because he earns a living by
any kind of work.

That's how a brahmin is a brahmin corpse-worker.

Doṇa, the ancient brahmin seers were Aṭṭhaka,
Vāmaka, Vāmadeva, Vessāmitta,
Yamadaggi, Aṅgīrasa, Bhāradvāja,
Vāseṭṭha, Kassapa, and Bhagu. They were the authors and
propagators of the hymns, whose hymnal was sung and propagated and
compiled in ancient times. These days, brahmins continue to sing and
chant it. They continue chanting what was chanted, reciting what was
recited, and teaching what was taught.

Those seers described five kinds of brahmins. A brahmin who is equal to
the Divinity, one who is equal to a god, one who toes the line, one who
crosses the line, and the fifth is a brahmin corpse-worker. Which one of
these are you, Doṇa?"

"This being so, Mister Gotama, I don't even qualify as a brahmin
corpse-worker.

Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.193 With Saṅgārava  *Saṅgāravasutta*

Then Saṅgārava the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Saṅgārava sat down to one side, and said to the
Buddha:

"What is the cause, Mister Gotama, what is the reason why sometimes even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced? And why is it that sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced?"

"Brahmin, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in
sensual desire and you don't truly understand the escape from sensual
desire that has arisen. At that time you don't truly know or see what is
good for yourself, good for another, or good for both. Even hymns that
are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was mixed with dye
such as red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. Even a person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see
it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was heated by
fire, boiling and bubbling. Even a person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the same way, when
your heart is overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are not
practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of
water overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. Even a person with clear
eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In
the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind,
let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in restlessness and
remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let
alone those that are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water
stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. Even a person
with clear eyes checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or
see it. In the same way, when your heart is overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that
are not practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that was cloudy,
murky, and muddy, hidden in the darkness. Even a person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection wouldn't truly know it or see it. In the
same way, there's a time when your heart is overcome and mired in doubt
and you don't truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At
that time you don't truly know or see what is good for yourself, good
for another, or good for both. Even hymns that are long-practiced don't
spring to mind, let alone those that are not practiced.

There's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual
desire and you truly understand the escape from sensual desire that has
arisen. At that time you truly know and see what is good for yourself,
good for another, and good for both. Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.
Suppose there was a bowl of water that was not mixed with dye such as
red lac, turmeric, indigo, or rose madder. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in sensual desire
... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ...
Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those
that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's not heated
by a fire, boiling and bubbling. A person with clear eyes checking their
own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way, when
your heart is not overcome and mired in ill will ... Even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not overgrown with moss and aquatic plants. A person with clear eyes
checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the
same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in dullness and
drowsiness ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in restlessness
and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's
not stirred by the wind, churning, swirling, and rippling. A person with
clear eyes checking their own reflection would truly know it and see it.
In the same way, when your heart is not overcome and mired in
restlessness and remorse ... Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring
to mind, let alone those that are practiced.

Furthermore, when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt ... Even
hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are
practiced. Suppose there was a bowl of water that's transparent, clear,
and unclouded, brought into the light. A person with clear eyes checking
their own reflection would truly know it and see it. In the same way,
there's a time when your heart is not overcome and mired in doubt and
you truly understand the escape from doubt that has arisen. At that time
you truly know and see what is good for yourself, good for another, and
good for both. Even hymns that are long-unpracticed spring to mind, let
alone those that are practiced.

This is the cause, brahmin, this is the reason why sometimes even hymns
that are long-practiced don't spring to mind, let alone those that are
not practiced. And this is why sometimes even hymns that are
long-unpracticed spring to mind, let alone those that are practiced."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! ... From this day forth, may Mister Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.194 With Kāraṇapālī  *Kāraṇapālīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time the brahmin Kāraṇapālī was working for the
Licchavis. He saw the brahmin Piṅgiyānī coming off in the
distance and said to him, "So, Piṅgiyānī, where are you
coming from in the middle of the day?"

"I'm coming, my good man, from the presence of the ascetic Gotama."

"What do you think of the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom? Do you
think he's astute?"

"My good man, who am I to judge the ascetic Gotama's lucidity of wisdom?
You'd really have to be on the same level to judge his lucidity of
wisdom."

"Mister Piṅgiyānī praises the ascetic Gotama with
magnificent praise indeed."

"Who am I to praise the ascetic Gotama? He is praised by the praised as
the first among gods and humans."

"But for what reason are you so devoted to the ascetic Gotama?"

"Suppose a person was completely satisfied by the best tasting food.
They wouldn't be attracted to anything that tasted inferior. In the same
way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be,
whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you're not attracted to the doctrines of the various
ascetics and brahmins.

Suppose a person who was weak with hunger was to obtain a honey-cake.
Wherever they taste it, they would enjoy a sweet, delicious flavor. In
the same way, when you hear Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may
be, whether statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, or amazing
stories---then you get a sense of uplift, a confidence of the heart.

Suppose a person were to obtain a piece of sandalwood, whether yellow or
red. Wherever they smelled it---whether at the root, the middle, or the
top---they'd enjoy a delicious fragrance. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you become filled
with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. A good
doctor would cure them on the spot. In the same way, when you hear
Mister Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed
prose & verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then you make an end of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

Suppose there was a lotus pond with clear, sweet, cool water, clean,
with smooth banks, delightful. Then along comes a person struggling in
the oppressive heat, weary, thirsty, and parched. They'd plunge into the
lotus pond to bathe and drink. And all their stress, weariness, and heat
exhaustion would die down. In the same way, when you hear Mister
Gotama's teaching---whatever it may be, whether statements, mixed prose
& verse, discussions, or amazing stories---then all your stress,
weariness, and exhaustion die down."

When this was said, the brahmin Kāraṇapālī got up from his
seat, arranged his robe over one shoulder, knelt on his right knee,
raised his joined palms toward the Buddha, and expressed this heartfelt
sentiment three times:

"Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Homage to that Blessed One, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha!

Excellent, Mister Piṅgiyānī! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, Mister Piṅgiyānī has made the
teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth,
may Mister Piṅgiyānī remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.195 Piṅgiyānī  *Piṅgiyānīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.

Now at that time around five hundred Licchavis were visiting the Buddha.
Some of the Licchavis were in blue, of blue color, clad in blue, adorned
with blue. And some were similarly colored in yellow, red, or white. But
the Buddha outshone them all in beauty and glory.

Then the brahmin Piṅgīyānī got up from his seat, arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said, "I feel inspired to speak, Blessed One! I feel inspired to
speak, Holy One!"

"Then speak as you feel inspired," said the Buddha. So the brahmin
Piṅgīyānī extolled the Buddha in his presence with a
fitting verse.

> "Like a fragrant pink lotus\
> that blooms in the morning, its fragrance unfaded---\
> see Aṅgīrasa shine,\
> bright as the sun in the sky!"

Then those Licchavis clothed Piṅgiyānī with five hundred
upper robes. And Piṅgiyānī clothed the Buddha with them.

Then the Buddha said to the Licchavis:

"Licchavis, the appearance of five treasures is rare in the world. What
five? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A
teacher of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. A
person who understands the teaching and training proclaimed by a
Realized One. A person who practices in line with the teaching. A person
who is grateful and thankful. The appearance of these five treasures is
rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.196 The Great Dreams  *Mahāsupinasutta*

"Mendicants, before his awakening five great dreams appeared to the
Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was
still not awake but intent on awakening. What five?

This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains, was his
pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His right hand
was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid down in
the southern sea. This is the first great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel and
stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This is the second great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet and
covered his knees. This is the third great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Next, four birds of different colors came from the four quarters. They
fell at his feet, turning pure white. This is the fourth great dream
that appeared to the Realized One before his awakening.

Next, he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth while
remaining unsoiled. This is the fifth great dream that appeared to the
Realized One before his awakening.

Now, as to when, before his awakening, the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha was still not awake but intent on
awakening. This great earth was his bed. Himalaya, king of mountains,
was his pillow. His left hand was laid down in the eastern sea. His
right hand was laid down in the western sea. And both his feet were laid
down in the southern sea. This was fulfilled when the Buddha awakened to
the perfect awakening. This was the first great dream that appeared to
him while he was still not awakened.

As to when a kind of grass called 'the crosser' grew up from his navel
and stood pushing against the cloudy sky. This was fulfilled when, after
the Buddha had awakened to the noble eightfold path, it was well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans. This was the second great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when white caterpillars with black heads crawled up from his feet
and covered his knees. This was fulfilled when many white-clothed
laypeople went for refuge to him for life. This was the third great
dream that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

As to when four birds of different colors came from the four quarters.
They fell at his feet, turning pure white. This was fulfilled when
members of the four classes---aristocrats, brahmins, peasants, and
menials---went forth from the lay life to homelessness in the teaching
and training proclaimed by the Realized One and realized supreme
freedom. This was the fourth great dream that appeared to him while he
was still not awakened.

As to when he walked back and forth on top of a huge mountain of filth
while remaining unsoiled. This was fulfilled when the Realized One
received robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. And he used them untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This was the fifth great dream
that appeared to him while he was still not awakened.

Before his awakening these five great dreams appeared to the Realized
One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, when he was still not
awake but intent on awakening."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.197 Obstacles to Rain  *Vassasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five obstacles to rain, which the
forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not traverse. What
five?

In the upper atmosphere the fire element flares up, which disperses the
clouds. This is the first obstacle to rain, which the forecasters don't
know, and which their vision does not traverse.

Furthermore, in the upper atmosphere the air element flares up, which
disperses the clouds. This is the second obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, Rāhu, lord of titans, receives water in his
hand and tosses it in the ocean. This is the third obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, the gods of the rain clouds become negligent. This is the
fourth obstacle to rain ...

Furthermore, humans become unprincipled. This is the fifth obstacle to
rain, which the forecasters don't know, and which their vision does not
traverse.

These are the five obstacles to rain, which the forecasters don't know,
and which their vision does not traverse."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.198 Well-Spoken Words  *Vācāsutta*

"Mendicants, speech that has five factors is well spoken, not poorly
spoken. It's blameless and is not criticized by sensible people. What
five? It is speech that is timely, true, gentle, beneficial, and loving.
Speech with these five factors is well spoken, not poorly spoken. It's
blameless and is not criticized by sensible people."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.199 Families  *Kulasutta*

"When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for five reasons. What five?

When they see ethical renunciates coming to their family, the people
bring up confidence in their hearts. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to heaven.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people rise from
their seats, bow down, and offer them a seat. At that time the family is
practicing a path leading to a birth in an eminent family.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people get rid of the
stain of stinginess. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to being illustrious.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people share what
they have as best they can. At that time the family is practicing a path
leading to great wealth.

When ethical renunciates come to their family, the people ask questions
and listen to the teachings. At that time the family is practicing a
path leading to great wisdom.

When ethical renunciates come to a family, the people create much merit
for these five reasons."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.200 Elements of Escape  *Nissāraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five elements of escape. What five?

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on sensual pleasures, but on that
their mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on renunciation, on that their mind leaps
forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided. Their mind
is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed, and well
detached from sensual pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and
feverish defilements that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they
don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the escape from
sensual pleasures is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.

Delight in sensual pleasures, ill will, harming, form, and substantial
reality don't linger within them. That's why they're called a mendicant
who is without underlying tendencies, who has cut off craving, untied
the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of
suffering. These are the five elements of escape."



## The Chapter with Kimbila

### N 5.201 With Kimbila  *Kimilasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimbilā in the
Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then Venerable Kimbila went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
the training, and each other after the final quenching of the Realized
One. This is the cause, this is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain
respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, and each other after the final
quenching of the Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why
the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of the
Realized One."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.202 Listening to the Teaching  *Dhammassavanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five benefits of listening to the teaching.
What five? You learn new things, clarify what you've learned, get over
uncertainty, correct your views, and inspire confidence in your mind.
These are the five benefits of listening to the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.203 A Thoroughbred  *Assājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with five factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

What five? Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. A fine
royal thoroughbred with these five factors is worthy of a king. ... In
the same way, a mendicant with five qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world.

What five? Integrity, speed, gentleness, patience, and sweetness. A
mendicant with these five qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.204 Powers  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five powers. What five? Faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom. These are the five powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.205 Hard-heartedness  *Cetokhilasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of hard-heartedness. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about the Teacher. They're uncertain,
undecided, and lacking confidence. This being so, their mind doesn't
incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving. This is
the first kind of hard-heartedness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset
with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness. These are the
five kinds of hard-heartedness."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.206 Shackles  *Vinibandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. This being so, their mind
doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence, and striving.
This is the first shackle of the heart.

Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
belly is full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one
of the orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or
fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart. These
are the five shackles of the heart."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.207 Porridge  *Yāgusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five benefits of porridge. What five? It
wards off hunger, quenches thirst, settles the wind, cleans the bladder,
and helps digestion. These are the five benefits of porridge."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.208 Chew Sticks  *Dantakaṭṭhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of not using chew sticks.
What five? It's not good for your eyes, you get bad breath, your
taste-buds aren't cleaned, bile and phlegm cover your food, and you lose
your appetite. These are the five drawbacks of not using chew sticks.

There are these five benefits of using chew sticks. What five? It's good
for your eyes, you don't get bad breath, your taste-buds are cleaned,
bile and phlegm don't cover your food, and food agrees with you. These
are the five benefits of using chew sticks."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.209 The Sound of Singing  *Gītassarasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in reciting with a drawn-out
singing voice. What five? You relish the sound of your own voice. Others
relish the sound of your voice. Householders complain: 'These ascetics
who follow the Sakyan, sing just like us!' When you're enjoying the
melody, your immersion breaks up. Those who come after follow your
example. These are the five drawbacks in reciting with a drawn-out
singing voice."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.210 Unmindful  *Muṭṭhassatisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful
and unaware. What five? You sleep badly and wake miserably. You have bad
dreams. The deities don't protect you. And you emit semen. These are the
five drawbacks of falling asleep unmindful and unaware.

There are these five benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware. What
five? You sleep at ease and wake happily. You don't have bad dreams. The
deities protect you. And you don't emit semen. These are the five
benefits of falling asleep mindful and aware."

## The Chapter on Abuse

### N 5.211 An Abuser  *Akkosakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who abuses and insults their spiritual
companions, denouncing the noble ones, can expect these five drawbacks.
What five? They're expelled, cut off, blocked out; or they commit a
corrupt offense; or they contract a severe illness. They feel lost when
they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A mendicant who
abuses and insults their spiritual companions, denouncing the noble
ones, can expect these five drawbacks."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.212 Starting Arguments  *Bhaṇḍanakārakasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who starts arguments, quarrels, disputes,
debates, and disciplinary issues in the Saṅgha can expect
five drawbacks. What five? They don't achieve the unachieved. What they
have achieved falls away. They get a bad reputation. They feel lost when
they die. And when their body breaks up, after death, they are reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. A mendicant who
starts arguments, quarrels, disputes, debates, and disciplinary issues
in the Saṅgha can expect these five drawbacks."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.213 Ethics  *Sīlasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for an unethical person
because of their failure in ethics. What five?

Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person gets a bad reputation. This is the
second drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and
embarrassed, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person feels lost when they die. This is the
fourth drawback.

Furthermore, an unethical person, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
This is the fifth drawback. These are the five drawbacks for an
unethical person because of their failure in ethics.

There are these five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics. What five? Firstly, an ethical person gains
great wealth on account of diligence. This is the first benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person gets a good reputation. This is the
second benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and
self-assured, whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or ascetics. This is the third benefit.

Furthermore, an ethical person dies not feeling lost. This is the fourth
benefit.

Furthermore, when an ethical person's body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth
benefit.

These are the five benefits for an ethical person because of their
accomplishment in ethics."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.214 Someone Who Talks a Lot  *Bahubhāṇisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a person who talks a
lot. What five? They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five
drawbacks for a person who talks a lot.

There are these five benefits for a person who talks thoughtfully. What
five? They don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, and
nonsensical. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five benefits for a person
who talks thoughtfully."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.215 Intolerance (1st)  *Paṭhamaakkhantisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and disagreeable. You have lots of enmity
and many faults. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you dear and agreeable. You have little enmity and few faults. You don't
feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.216 Intolerance (2nd)  *Dutiyaakkhantisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of intolerance. What five?
Most people find you unlikable and disagreeable. You're cruel and
remorseful. You feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up,
after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks to intolerance.

There are these five benefits of tolerance. What five? Most people find
you likable and agreeable. You're neither cruel nor remorseful. You
don't feel lost when you die. And when your body breaks up, after death,
you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These are the five
benefits of tolerance."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.217 Unimpressive Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamaapāsādikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of unimpressive conduct.
What five? You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people
criticize you. You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And
when your body breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss,
a bad place, the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of
unimpressive conduct.

There are these five benefits of impressive conduct. What five? You
don't blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You
get a good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. And when the
body breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. These are the five benefits of impressive conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.218 Unimpressive Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyaapāsādikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of unimpressive conduct.
What five? You don't inspire confidence in those without it. You cause
some with confidence to change their minds. You don't follow the
Teacher's instructions. Those who come after you follow your example.
And your mind doesn't become clear. These are the five drawbacks of
unimpressive conduct.

There are these five benefits of impressive conduct. What five? You
inspire confidence in those without it. You increase confidence in those
who have it. You follow the Teacher's instructions. Those who come after
you follow your example. And your mind becomes clear. These are the five
benefits of impressive conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.219 Fire  *Aggisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a fire. What five? It's
bad for your eyes. It's bad for your complexion. It makes you weak. It
draws in groups. And it encourages low talk. These are the five
drawbacks of a fire."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.220 About Madhurā  *Madhurāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of Madhurā.
What five? The ground is uneven and dusty, the dogs are fierce, the
native spirits are vicious, and it's hard to get almsfood. These are the
five drawbacks of Madhurā."

## The Chapter on Long Wandering

### N 5.221 Long Wandering (1st)  *Paṭhamadīghacārikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't learn new things. You don't
clarify what you've learned. You lack confidence in some things you have
learned. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You learn new things. You clarify what you've learned. You have
confidence in some things you have learned. You don't contract severe
illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits of a reasonable
amount of wandering."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.222 Long Wandering (2nd)  *Dutiyadīghacārikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for someone who likes long
and aimless wandering. What five? You don't achieve the unachieved. What
you have achieved falls away. You lose confidence in some things you've
achieved. You contract a severe illness. You don't have any friends.
These are the five drawbacks for someone who likes long and aimless
wandering.

There are these five benefits of a reasonable amount of wandering. What
five? You achieve the unachieved. What you have achieved doesn't fall
away. You're confident in some things you've achieved. You don't
contract severe illness. You have friends. These are the five benefits
of a reasonable amount of wandering."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.223 Overstaying  *Atinivāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You have a lot of stuff and store it up. You have a lot of medicine and
store it up. You have a lot of duties and responsibilities, and become
capable in whatever needs to be done. You mix closely with laypeople and
renunciates, socializing inappropriately like a layperson. And when you
leave that monastery, you miss it. These are the five drawbacks of
overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You don't have a lot of stuff and store it up. You
don't have a lot of medicine and store it up. You don't have a lot of
duties and responsibilities, or become capable in whatever needs to be
done. You don't mix closely with laypeople and renunciates, socializing
inappropriately like a layperson. And when you leave that monastery, you
don't miss it. These are the five benefits of staying for a reasonable
length of time."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.224 Stingy  *Maccharīsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of overstaying. What five?
You become stingy with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and
the teaching. These are the five drawbacks of overstaying.

There are these five benefits of staying for a reasonable length of
time. What five? You're not stingy with dwellings, families, material
things, praise, and the teaching. These are the five benefits of staying
for a reasonable length of time."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.225 Visiting Families (1st)  *Paṭhamakulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of visiting families. What
five? You fall into an offense for wandering without leave. You fall
into an offense for sitting in a private place with someone of the
opposite sex. You fall into an offense for sitting in a hidden place
with someone of the opposite sex. You fall into an offense for teaching
more than five or six sentences to someone of the opposite sex. You have
a lot of sensual thoughts. These are the five drawbacks of visiting
families."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.226 Visiting Families (2nd)  *Dutiyakulūpakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a mendicant who visits
families for too long, mixing closely with them. What five? You often
see members of the opposite sex. Seeing them, you become close. Being so
close, you become intimate. Being intimate, lust overcomes you. When
your mind is swamped by lust, you can expect that you will lead the
spiritual life dissatisfied, or commit one of the corrupt offenses, or
resign the training and return to a lesser life. These are the five
drawbacks for a mendicant who visits families for too long, mixing
closely with them."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.227 Riches  *Bhogasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of riches. What five? Fire,
water, kings, thieves, and unloved heirs all take a share. These are the
five drawbacks of riches.

There are these five benefits of riches. What five? Riches enable you to
make yourself happy and pleased, to make your mother and father; your
children, partners, bondservants, workers, and staff, and your friends
and colleagues happy and pleased, and to keep them all happy. And they
enable you to establish an uplifting religious donation for ascetics and
brahmins that's conducive to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to
heaven. These are the five benefits of riches."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.228 Eating Late  *Ussūrabhattasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks for a family who takes their
meals late in the day. What five? When guests visit, they are not served
on time. The deities who accept spirit-offerings are not served on time.
Ascetics and brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from
eating at night, and from food at the wrong time are not served on time.
Bondservants, workers, and staff do their duties neglectfully. A meal
eaten during the wrong period is not nutritious. These are the five
drawbacks for a family who takes their meals late in the day.

There are these five benefits for a family who takes their meals at a
proper time. What five? When guests visit, they are served on time. The
deities who accept spirit-offerings are served on time. Ascetics and
brahmins who eat in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at
night, and from food at the wrong time are served on time. Bondservants,
workers, and staff do their duties attentively. A meal eaten during the
proper period is nutritious. These are the five benefits for a family
who takes their meals at a proper time."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.229 Black Snakes (1st)  *Paṭhamakaṇhasappasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are
the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
filthy, stinking, cowardly, frightening, and treacherous. These are the
five drawbacks of a female."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.230 Black Snakes (2nd)  *Dutiyakaṇhasappasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of a black snake. What five?
It's irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous.
These are the five dangers of a black snake.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a female. What five? She's
irritable, acrimonious, venomous, fork-tongued, and treacherous. This is
a female's venom: usually she's very lustful. This is a female's forked
tongue: usually she speaks divisively. This is a female's treachery:
usually she's an adulteress. These are the five drawbacks of a female."

## The Chapter on a Resident Mendicant

### N 5.231 A Resident Mendicant  *Āvāsikasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is not admirable.
What five? They're not accomplished in being well-presented and doing
their duties. They're not very learned and don't remember what they've
learned. They're not self-effacing and don't enjoy self-effacement.
They're not a good speaker and do not enunciate well. They're witless,
dull, and idiotic. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is not
admirable.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is admirable. What five?
They're accomplished in being well-presented and doing their duties.
They're very learned and remember what they've learned. They're
self-effacing and enjoy self-effacement. They're a good speaker who
enunciates well. They're wise, bright, and clever. A resident mendicant
with these five qualities is admirable."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.232 Liked  *Piyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is dear and
beloved to their spiritual companions, respected and admired. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is dear and beloved to
their spiritual companions, respected and admired."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.233 Beautification  *Sobhanasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities beautifies the
monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They're a good speaker who enunciates well, with a polished, clear, and
articulate voice that expresses the meaning.

They're able to educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire those who
approach them with a Dhamma talk.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities beautifies the
monastery."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.234 Very Helpful  *Bahūpakārasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is very helpful to
the monastery. What five?

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's totally full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They repair what is decayed and damaged.

When a large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants
from abroad, they go to the lay people and announce:

'A large mendicant Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from
abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to make merit!'

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

A resident mendicant with these five qualities is very helpful to the
monastery."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.235 A Sympathetic Mendicant  *Anukampasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities shows sympathy to
the lay people. What five? They encourage them in higher ethics. They
equip them to see the truth of the teachings. When they are sick, they
go to them and prompt their mindfulness, saying: 'Establish your
mindfulness, good sirs, in what is worthy.' When a large mendicant
Saṅgha is arriving with mendicants from abroad, they go to
the lay people and announce: 'A large mendicant Saṅgha is
arriving with mendicants from abroad. Make merit! Now is the time to
make merit!' And they eat whatever food they give them, coarse or fine,
not wasting a gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities shows sympathy to the lay people."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.236 Deserving Criticism (1st)  *Paṭhamaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
Without examining or scrutinizing, they arouse faith in things that are
dubious, and they don't arouse faith in things that are inspiring. And
they waste a gift given in faith. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They don't
arouse faith in things that are dubious, and they do arouse faith in
things that are inspiring. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.237 Deserving Criticism (2nd)  *Dutiyaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy and avaricious regarding monasteries. They're not stingy and
avaricious regarding families. And they don't waste a gift given in
faith. A resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.238 Deserving Criticism (3rd)  *Tatiyaavaṇṇārahasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? Without examining or scrutinizing, they praise those
deserving of criticism, and they criticize those deserving of praise.
They're stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? After examining and scrutinizing, they criticize those deserving
of criticism, and they praise those deserving of praise. They're not
stingy regarding monasteries, families, and material things. A resident
mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.239 Stinginess (1st)  *Paṭhamamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, and praise. And they waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, and praise. And they don't waste a gift given in faith. A
resident mendicant with these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.240 Stinginess (2nd)  *Dutiyamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, a resident mendicant with five qualities is cast down to
hell. What five? They're stingy regarding monasteries, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with
these five qualities is cast down to hell.

A resident mendicant with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What
five? They're not stingy regarding monasteries, families, material
things, praise, and the teachings. A resident mendicant with these five
qualities is raised up to heaven."

## The Chapter on Bad Conduct

### N 5.241 Bad Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You feel lost when you die. And when your body
breaks up, after death, you're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You don't feel lost when you die. When your body breaks
up, after death, you're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. These
are the five benefits of good conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.242 Bad Bodily Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamakāyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.243 Bad Verbal Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamavacīduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.244 Bad Mental Conduct (1st)  *Paṭhamamanoduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.245 Bad Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of bad conduct. What five?
You blame yourself. After examination, sensible people criticize you.
You get a bad reputation. You drift away from true teachings. You settle
on untrue teachings. These are the five drawbacks of bad conduct.

There are these five benefits of good conduct. What five? You don't
blame yourself. After examination, sensible people praise you. You get a
good reputation. You drift away from untrue teachings. You settle on
true teachings. These are the five benefits of good conduct."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.246 Bad Bodily Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyakāyaduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad bodily conduct ...
benefits in good bodily conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.247 Bad Verbal Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyavacīduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad verbal conduct ...
benefits in good verbal conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.248 Bad Mental Conduct (2nd)  *Dutiyamanoduccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks in bad mental conduct ...
benefits in good mental conduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.249 A Charnel Ground  *Sivathikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks to a charnel ground. What
five?

It's filthy, stinking, frightening, a gathering place for savage
monsters, and a weeping place for many people. These are the five
drawbacks of a charnel ground.

In the same way there are five drawbacks of a person like a charnel
ground. What five? To start with, a person has filthy conduct by way of
body, speech, and mind. This is how they're filthy, I say. That person
is just as filthy as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they get a bad reputation. This is how
they're stinky, I say. That person is just as stinky as a charnel
ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, good-hearted spiritual companions avoid
them from afar. That's how they're frightening, I say. That person is
just as frightening as a charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, they live together with people of a
similar character. This is how they gather with savage monsters, I say.
That person is just as much a gathering place of savage monsters as a
charnel ground.

Because of their filthy conduct, when good-hearted spiritual companions
see them they complain: 'Oh, it's so painful for us to have to live
together with such as these.' This is how there's weeping, I say. This
person is just as much a weeping place for many people as a charnel
ground.

These are the five drawbacks of a person like a charnel ground."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.250 Faith in Individuals  *Puggalappasādasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five drawbacks of placing faith in an
individual. What five?

The individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an offense such
that the Saṅgha suspends them. It occurs to them: 'This
person dear and beloved to me has been suspended by the
Saṅgha.' They lose much of their faith in mendicants. So
they don't frequent other mendicants, they don't hear the true teaching,
and they fall away from the true teaching. This is the first drawback in
placing faith in an individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted falls into an
offense such that the Saṅgha makes them sit at the end of
the line. ... This is the second drawback in placing faith in an
individual.

Furthermore, the individual to whom a person is devoted departs for
another region ... disrobes ... passes away. It occurs to them: 'This
person dear and beloved to me has passed away.' So they don't frequent
other mendicants, they don't hear the true teaching, and they fall away
from the true teaching. This is the fifth drawback in placing faith in
an individual.

These are the five drawbacks of placing faith in an individual."



## The Chapter on Ordination

### N 5.251 Who Should Give Ordination  *Upasampādetabbasutta*

"Mendicants, ordination should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Ordination should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.252 Who Should Give Dependence  *Nissayasutta*

"Mendicants, dependence should be given by a mendicant with five
qualities. What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an
adept's ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision
of freedom. Dependence should be given by a mendicant with these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.253 Who Should Have a Novice as Attendant  *Sāmaṇerasutta*

"Mendicants, a novice should attend on a mendicant with five qualities.
What five? It's a mendicant who has the entire spectrum of an adept's
ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the knowledge and vision of
freedom. A novice should attend on a mendicant with these five
qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.254 Five Kinds of Stinginess  *Pañcamacchariyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five kinds of stinginess. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. These are the five kinds of stinginess. The most contemptible
of these five kinds of stinginess is stinginess with the teachings."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.255 Giving Up Stinginess  *Macchariyappahānasutta*

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
five kinds of stinginess. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. The spiritual life
is lived to give up and cut out these five kinds of stinginess."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.256 The First Absorption  *Paṭhamajhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and the teachings. Without giving up
these five qualities you can't enter and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings. After giving up these five
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.257--263 The Second Absorption, Etc.  *Dutiyajhānasuttādisattaka*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the
teachings. Without giving up these five qualities you can't realize
perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and the teachings. After
giving up these five qualities you can realize perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.264 Another Discourse on the First Absorption  *Aparapaṭhamajhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings,
families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What five? Stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and thankfulness. After
giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the first
absorption."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.265--271 Another Discourse on the Second Absorption, Etc.  *Aparadutiyajhānasuttādi*

"Mendicants, without giving up these five qualities you can't enter and
remain in the second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth
absorption ... or realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of
once-return ... the fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five?
Stinginess with dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack
of gratitude and thankfulness. Without giving up these five qualities
you can't realize perfection.

But after giving up these five qualities you can enter and remain in the
second absorption ... third absorption ... fourth absorption ... and
realize the fruit of stream-entry ... the fruit of once-return ... the
fruit of non-return ... perfection. What five? Stinginess with
dwellings, families, material things, praise, and lack of gratitude and
thankfulness. After giving up these five qualities you can realize
perfection."

## Abbreviated Texts on Appointments

### N 5.272 A Meal Designator  *Bhattuddesakasutta*

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
meal designator. What five? They make decisions prejudiced by
favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they don't know if
a meal has been assigned or not. A person with these five qualities
should not be appointed as meal designator.

A person with five qualities should be appointed as meal designator.
What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a meal has been
assigned or not. A person with these five qualities should be appointed
as meal designator.

A person with five qualities who has been appointed as meal designator
should not be called upon ... should be called upon ... should be known
as a fool ... should be known as astute ... they keep themselves broken
and damaged ... they keep themselves unbroken and undamaged ... is cast
down to hell ... is raised up to heaven. What five? They don't make
decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, and cowardice.
And they know if a meal has been assigned or not. A meal designator with
these five qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.273--285 A Lodgings Assigner  *Senāsanapaññāpakasuttādi*

"Mendicants, a person with five qualities should not be appointed as
lodgings assigner ... they don't know if a lodging has been assigned or
not ... A person with five qualities should be appointed as lodgings
assigner ... they know if a lodging has been assigned or not ...

A person should not be appointed as lodgings allocator ... they don't
know if a lodging has been allocated or not ... A person should be
appointed as lodgings allocator ... they know if a lodging has been
allocated or not ...

A person should not be appointed as storeperson ... they don't know if
stores are protected or not ... A person should be appointed as
storeperson ... they know if stores are protected or not ...

... robe receiver ...

... robe distributor ...

... porridge distributor ...

... fruit distributor ...

... cake distributor ...

... dispenser of minor accessories ...

... allocator of bathing cloths ...

... bowl allocator ...

... supervisor of monastery staff ...

... supervisor of novices ...

What five? They don't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism,
hostility, stupidity, and cowardice. And they know if a novice has been
supervised or not. A supervisor of novices with these five qualities is
raised up to heaven."

## Abbreviated Texts on Training Rules

### N 5.286 A Monk  *Bhikkhusutta*

"Mendicants, a monk with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five?
He kills living creatures, steals, has sex, lies, and consumes beer,
wine, and liquor intoxicants. A monk with these five qualities is cast
down to hell.

A monk with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? He doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, have sex, lie, or consume beer, wine, and
liquor intoxicants. A monk with these five qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.287--292 A Nun  *Bhikkhunīsuttādi*

"A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is cast down to hell. What five? They
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. With these five qualities they're
cast down to hell.

A nun ... trainee nun ... novice monk ... novice nun ... layman ...
laywoman ... with five qualities is raised up to heaven. What five? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or
consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. With these five qualities
they're raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.293 An Ājīvaka  *Ājīvakasutta*

"Mendicants, an Ājīvaka ascetic with five qualities is cast
down to hell. What five? They kill living creatures, steal, have sex,
lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. An
Ājīvaka ascetic with these five qualities is cast down to
hell."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.294--302 A Jain Ascetic, Etc.  *Nigaṇṭhasuttādi*

"A Jain ascetic ... disciple of the shavelings ... a matted-hair ascetic
... a wanderer ... a follower of Māgaṇḍiya ... a
trident-bearing ascetic ... a follower of the unobstructed ... a
follower of Gotama ... a performer of rituals for the gods ... with five
qualities is cast down to hell. What five? They kill living creatures,
steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, and consume beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants. With these five qualities they're cast down to hell."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### N 5.303 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, drawbacks, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.304 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perceptions of impermanence, not-self, death, repulsiveness of food, and
dissatisfaction with the whole world. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.305 Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence,
the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up,
and the perception of fading away. For insight into greed, these five
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.306 Untitled Discourse on Greed (4th)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For
insight into greed, these five things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.307 Untitled Discourse on Greed (5th)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, five things should be developed. What five? The
powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. For insight
into greed, these five things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.308--1152 Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc.  *\~*

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, five things should be developed."

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... five things should be developed.

What five? The powers of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. For the letting go of negligence, these five things should be
developed."

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE FIVES IS FINISHED.
:::

# The Book of the Sixes


## The Chapter on Worthy of Offerings

### N 6.1 Worthy of Offerings (1st)  *Paṭhamaāhuneyyasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who, when they see a sight with their eyes, is neither
happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad.
They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### N 6.2 Worthy of Offerings (2nd)  *Dutiyaāhuneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who wields the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
themselves and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful. They control the body as far as the realm of divinity.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' And so they recollect their many
kinds of past lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds: 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.3 Faculties  *Indriyasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.4 Powers  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? The powers of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And they realize the undefiled
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live
having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.5 The Thoroughbred (1st)  *Paṭhamaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

What six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's beautiful. A fine royal
thoroughbred with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a
king, and is considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.6 The Thoroughbred (2nd)  *Dutiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's strong. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.7 The Thoroughbred (3rd)  *Tatiyaājānīyasutta*

"Mendicants, a fine royal thoroughbred with six factors is worthy of a
king, fit to serve a king, and is considered a factor of kingship. What
six? It's when a fine royal thoroughbred can endure sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, and touches. And it's fast. A fine royal thoroughbred
with these six factors is worthy of a king, fit to serve a king, and is
considered a factor of kingship.

In the same way, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six? It's when a mendicant can endure
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. A mendicant with
these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy
of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of veneration
with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.8 Unsurpassable  *Anuttariyasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things are unsurpassable. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection. These are the six unsurpassable things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.9 Topics for Recollection  *Anussatiṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six topics for recollection. What six? The
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
ethics, generosity, and the deities. These are the six topics for
recollection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.10 With Mahānāma  *Mahānāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Then Mahānāma
the Sakyan went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him:

"Sir, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions, what kind of meditation do they frequently practice?"

"Mahānāma, when a noble disciple has reached the fruit and
understood the instructions they frequently practice this kind of
meditation.

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who
lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled
among people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the
teaching and develop the recollection of the Buddha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called
a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced,
and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the teaching.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical conduct,
which is intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When a noble
disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a noble disciple who lives
in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
develop the recollection of ethics.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of generosity.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and
gods even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here,
they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
the deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple
whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the
teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. When you're joyful,
rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes
tranquil. When the body is tranquil, you feel bliss. And when you're
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is
called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are
unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've
entered the stream of the teaching and develop the recollection of the
deities.

When a noble disciple has reached the fruit and understood the
instructions this is the kind of meditation they frequently practice."

## The Chapter on Warm-hearted

### N 6.11 Warm-hearted (1st)  *Paṭhamasāraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six warm-hearted qualities. What six?

Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with
bodily kindness, both in public and in private. This is a warm-hearted
quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a warm-hearted quality.

These are the six warm-hearted qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.12 Warm-hearted (2nd)  *Dutiyasāraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, these six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.
What six?

Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions with
bodily kindness, both in public and in private. This warm-hearted
quality makes for fondness and respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony,
and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness ...

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the view shared with their
spiritual companions, both in public and in private. That view is noble
and emancipating, and delivers one who practices it to the complete
ending of suffering. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and
respect, conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

These six warm-hearted qualities make for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.13 Elements of Escape  *Nissāraṇīyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six elements of escape. What six?

Take a mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by love.
I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it up,
consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow ill will still
occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! Don't say
that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for misrepresentation of the Buddha
is not good. And the Buddha would not say that. It's impossible,
reverend, it cannot happen that the heart's release by love has been
developed and properly implemented, yet somehow ill will still occupies
the mind. For it is the heart's release by love that is the escape from
ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow discontent
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by rejoicing that is the escape from
discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow desire
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by equanimity that is the escape from
desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow my
consciousness still follows after signs.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! ... For it is the signless release of the heart that is the
escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupies the mind.
For it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from
the dart of doubt and indecision.'

These are the six elements of escape."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.14 A Good Death  *Bhaddakasutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant lives life so as to not have a good death. And how do they
live life so as to not have a good death?

Take a mendicant who relishes work, talk, sleep, company, closeness, and
proliferation. They love these things and like to relish them. A
mendicant who lives life like this does not have a good death. This is
called a mendicant who enjoys substantial reality, who hasn't given up
substantial reality to rightly make an end of suffering.

A mendicant lives life so as to have a good death. And how do they live
life so as to have a good death?

Take a mendicant who doesn't relish work, talk, sleep, company,
closeness, and proliferation. They don't love these things or like to
relish them. A mendicant who lives life like this has a good death. This
is called a mendicant who delights in extinguishment, who has given up
substantial reality to rightly make an end of suffering.

> A beast who likes to proliferate,\
> enjoying proliferation,\
> fails to win extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> But one who gives up proliferation,\
> enjoying the state of non-proliferation,\
> wins extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.15 Regret  *Anutappiyasutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"As a mendicant makes their bed, so they must lie in it, and die
tormented by regrets. And how do they die tormented by regrets?

Take a mendicant who relishes work, talk, sleep, company, closeness, and
proliferation. They love these things and like to relish them. A
mendicant who makes their bed like this must lie in it, and die
tormented by regrets. This is called a mendicant who enjoys substantial
reality, who hasn't given up substantial reality to rightly make an end
of suffering.

As a mendicant makes their bed, so they must lie in it, and die free of
regrets. And how do they die free of regrets?

Take a mendicant who doesn't relish work, talk, sleep, company,
closeness, and proliferation. They don't love these things or like to
relish them. A mendicant who makes their bed like this must lie in it,
and die free of regrets. This is called a mendicant who delights in
extinguishment, who has given up substantial reality to rightly make an
end of suffering.

> A beast who likes to proliferate,\
> enjoying proliferation,\
> fails to win extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
>
> But one who gives up proliferation,\
> enjoying the state of non-proliferation,\
> wins extinguishment,\
> the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.16 Nakula's Father  *Nakulapitusutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. Now
at that time the householder Nakula's father was sick, suffering,
gravely ill. Then the housewife Nakula's mother said to him:

"Householder, don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering,
and it's criticized by the Buddha. Householder, you might think: 'When
I've gone, the housewife Nakula's mother won't be able to provide for
the children and keep up the household carpets.' But you should not see
it like this. I'm skilled at spinning cotton and carding wool. I'm able
to provide for the children and keep up the household carpets. So
householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'When I've gone, the housewife Nakula's
mother will take another husband.' But you should not see it like this.
Both you and I know that we have remained celibate while at home for the
past sixteen years. So householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'When I've gone, the housewife Nakula's
mother won't want to see the Buddha and his Saṅgha of
mendicants.' But you should not see it like this. When you've gone, I'll
want to see the Buddha and his mendicant Saṅgha even more.
So householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother won't
fulfill ethics.' But you should not see it like this. I am one of those
white-robed disciples of the Buddha who fulfills their ethics. Whoever
doubts this can go and ask the Buddha. He is staying in the land of the
Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's
Wood. So householder, don't pass away with concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother doesn't
have internal serenity of heart.' But you should not see it like this. I
am one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has internal
serenity of heart. Whoever doubts this can go and ask the Buddha. He is
staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park
at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. So householder, don't pass away with
concerns ...

Householder, you might think: 'The housewife Nakula's mother has not
gained a basis, a firm basis, and solace in this teaching and training.
She has not gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained
assurance. And she's not independent of others in the Teacher's
instructions.' But you should not see it like this. I am one of those
white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has gained a basis, a firm
basis, and solace in this teaching and training. I have gone beyond
doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained assurance. And I am independent
of others in the Teacher's instructions. Whoever doubts this can go and
ask the Buddha. He is staying in the land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile
Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood. So householder,
don't pass away with concerns. Such concern is suffering, and it's
criticized by the Buddha."

And then, as Nakula's mother was giving this advice to Nakula's father,
his illness died down on the spot. And that's how Nakula's father
recovered from that illness. Soon after recovering, leaning on a staff
he went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said
to him:

"You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, to have the housewife
Nakula's mother advise and instruct you out of kindness and sympathy.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who fulfills
their ethics.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has internal
serenity of heart.

She is one of those white-robed disciples of the Buddha who has gained a
basis, a firm basis, and solace in this teaching and training. She has
gone beyond doubt, got rid of indecision, and gained assurance. And she
is independent of others in the Teacher's instructions.

You're fortunate, householder, so very fortunate, to have the housewife
Nakula's mother advise and instruct you out of kindness and sympathy."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.17 Sleep  *Soppasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat, went to the
assembly hall, and sat down on the seat spread out. Venerable
Sāriputta also came out of retreat, went to the assembly
hall, bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side. Venerables
Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa,
Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita,
Mahācunda, Mahākappina, Anuruddha, Revata, and
Ānanda did the same. The Buddha spent much of the night sitting in
meditation, then got up from his seat and entered his dwelling. And soon
after the Buddha left those venerables each went to their own dwelling.

But those mendicants who were junior, recently gone forth, newly come to
this teaching and training slept until the sun came up, snoring. The
Buddha saw them doing this, with his clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman. He went to the assembly hall, sat down on the seat spread
out, and addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, where is Sāriputta? Where are
Mahāmoggallāna, Mahākassapa,
Mahākaccāna, Mahākoṭṭhita,
Mahācunda, Mahākappina, Anuruddha, Revata, and
Ānanda? Where have these senior disciples gone?"

"Soon after the Buddha left those venerables each went to their own
dwelling."

"So, mendicants, when the senior mendicants left, why did you sleep
until the sun came up, snoring?

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an
anointed aristocratic king who rules his whole life, dear and beloved to
the country, while indulging in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing as much as he likes?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an
appointed official ... a hereditary official ... a general ... a village
chief ... or a guild head who runs the guild his whole life, dear and
beloved to the guild, while indulging in the pleasures of sleeping,
lying down, and drowsing as much as he likes?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of an ascetic
or brahmin who indulges in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down, and
drowsing as much as they like? Their sense doors are unguarded, they eat
too much, they're not dedicated to wakefulness, they're unable to
discern skillful qualities, and they don't pursue the development of the
qualities that lead to awakening in the evening and toward dawn. Yet
they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements."

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing.

So you should train like this: 'We will guard our sense doors, eat in
moderation, be dedicated to wakefulness, discern skillful qualities, and
pursue the development of the qualities that lead to awakening in the
evening and toward dawn.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.18 A Fish Dealer  *Macchabandhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants.

While walking along the road he saw a fish dealer in a certain spot
selling fish that he had killed himself. Seeing this he left the road,
sat at the root of a tree on the seat spread out, and addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants, do you see that fish dealer selling fish that
he killed himself?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a fish
dealer selling fish that he killed himself who, by means of that work
and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or vehicle,
or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the fish are led to the slaughter he regards them
with bad intentions.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a butcher
of cattle selling cattle that he killed himself who, by means of that
work and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or
vehicle, or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the cattle are led to the slaughter he regards
them with bad intentions.

What do you think, mendicants? Have you ever seen or heard of a butcher
of sheep ... a butcher of pigs ... a butcher of poultry ... or a
deer-hunter selling deer which he killed himself who, by means of that
work and livelihood, got to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or
vehicle, or to enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! I too have never seen or heard of such a thing. Why
is that? Because when the deer are led to the slaughter he regards them
with bad intentions.

By regarding even animals led to the slaughter with bad intentions he
did not get to travel by elephant, horse, chariot, or vehicle, or to
enjoy wealth, or to live off a large fortune. How much worse is someone
who regards human beings brought to the slaughter with bad intentions!
This will be for their lasting harm and suffering. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.19 Mindfulness of Death (1st)  *Paṭhamamaraṇassatisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. But do you develop mindfulness of death?"

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, I
develop mindfulness of death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day and
night, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve
a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat a meal of almsfood, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow a single mouthful, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out,
I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a
lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

When this was said, the Buddha said to those mendicants:

"As to the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to
live for a day and night ... or to live for a day ... or to live as long
as it takes to eat a meal of almsfood ... or to live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls---these are called mendicants
who live negligently. They slackly develop mindfulness of death for the
ending of defilements.

But as to the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to
live as long as it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful ... or to
live as long as it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to
breathe in after breathing out---these are called mendicants who live
diligently. They keenly develop mindfulness of death for the ending of
defilements.

So you should train like this: 'We will live diligently. We will keenly
develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.' That's how
you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.20 Mindfulness of Death (2nd)  *Dutiyamaraṇassatisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. And how is mindfulness of death developed
and cultivated to be very fruitful and beneficial, to culminate in
freedom from death and end in freedom from death?

As day passes by and night draws close, a mendicant reflects: 'I might
die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or centipede
might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to me.
Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food poisoning, or suffer a
disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds. And if I died from that
it would be an obstacle to my progress. ' That mendicant should reflect:
'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given up, which
might be an obstacle to my progress if I die tonight?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant
should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Or else, as night passes by and day draws close, a mendicant reflects:
'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or
centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an
obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food
poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds.
And if I died from that it would be an obstacle to my progress. ' That
mendicant should reflect: 'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that
I haven't given up, which might be an obstacle to my progress if I die
today?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness. Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In
order to extinguish it, you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal,
vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same
way, in order to give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant
should apply intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death."

## The Chapter on Unsurpassable

### N 6.21 At Sāma Village  *Sāmakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans near the
little village of Sāma, by a lotus pond.

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire lotus
pond, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, three qualities lead to the decline of a mendicant. What three?
Relishing work, talk, and sleep. These three qualities lead to the
decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, adding:

"It's unfortunate for those of you who even the deities know are
declining in skillful qualities. I will teach you three more qualities
that lead to decline. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, are three qualities that lead to decline?
Enjoyment of company, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.
These three qualities lead to decline.

Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who decline in
skillful qualities do so because of these six qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.22 Non-decline  *Aparihāniyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you these six principles that prevent decline.
... And what, mendicants, are the six principles that prevent decline?
Not relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, being easy to admonish,
and having good friends. These six qualities prevent decline.

Whether in the past, future, or present, all those who have not declined
in skillful qualities do so because of these six qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.23 Dangers  *Bhayasutta*

"'Danger', mendicants, is a term for sensual pleasures. 'Suffering',
'disease', 'boil', 'snare', and 'bog' are terms for sensual pleasures.

And why is 'danger' a term for sensual pleasures? Someone who is
besotted by sensual greed and shackled by lustful desire is not freed
from dangers in this life or in lives to come. That is why 'danger' is a
term for sensual pleasures.

And why are 'suffering', 'disease', 'boil', 'snare', and 'bog' terms for
sensual pleasures? Someone who is besotted by sensual greed and shackled
by lustful desire is not freed from suffering, disease, boils, chains,
or bogs in this life or in lives to come. That is why these are terms
for sensual pleasures.

> Danger, suffering, disease, boils,\
> and snares and bogs both.\
> These describe the sensual pleasures\
> to which ordinary people are attached.
>
> Seeing the danger in grasping,\
> the origin of birth and death,\
> the unattached are freed\
> with the ending of birth and death.
>
> Happy, they've come to a safe place,\
> quenched in this very life.\
> They've gone beyond all threats and dangers,\
> and risen above all suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.24 The Himalaya  *Himavantasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities could shatter Himalaya,
the king of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance! What six? It's
when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in remaining
in immersion, skilled in emerging from immersion, skilled in gladdening
the mind for immersion, skilled in the meditation subjects for
immersion, and skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion. A
mendicant who has these six qualities could shatter Himalaya, the king
of mountains, let alone this wretched ignorance!"

<!--pg-->
### N 6.25 Topics for Recollection  *Anussatiṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six topics for recollection. What six?

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving. They've left
behind greed; they're free of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a
term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation. Relying on this, some
sentient beings are purified in this way.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical precepts,
which are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When
a noble disciple recollects their ethical precepts their mind is not
full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their generosity
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and
gods even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here,
they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom.'

When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities their mind is
not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is
unswerving. They've left behind greed; they're free of it and have risen
above it. 'Greed' is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.
Relying on this, some sentient beings are purified in this way.

These are the six topics for recollection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.26 With Mahākaccāna  *Mahākaccānasutta*

There Mahākaccāna addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahākaccāna said this:

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found
an opening amid confinement; that is, the six topics for recollection.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment. What six?

Firstly, a noble disciple recollects the Realized One: 'That Blessed One
is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving. They've left
behind greed; they're free of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a
term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation. That noble disciple
meditates with a heart just like space, abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Relying on this, some sentient beings
become pure in this way.

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the teaching: 'The teaching is
well explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, direct, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own ethical precepts,
which are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When
a noble disciple recollects their ethical precepts their mind is not
full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects their own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate! Among people full of the stain of
stinginess I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely
generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to
give and to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own
generosity their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ...

Furthermore, a noble disciple recollects the deities: 'There are the
gods of the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of
Yama, the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who
control what is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and
gods even higher than these. When those deities passed away from here,
they were reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the
faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and
the deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving. They've left behind greed; they're free
of it and have risen above it. 'Greed' is a term for the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. That noble disciple meditates with a heart just
like space, abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
Relying on this, some sentient beings become pure in this way.

It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing! How this Blessed One who knows
and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha, has found an
opening amid confinement; that is, the six topics for recollection. They
are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying,
to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to
realize extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.27 Proper Occasions (1st)  *Paṭhamasamayasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, how many occasions are there for going to see an esteemed
mendicant?"

"Mendicant, there are six occasions for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. What six?

Firstly, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and mired
in sensual desire, and they don't truly understand the escape from
sensual desire that has arisen. On that occasion they should go to an
esteemed mendicant and say: 'My heart is overcome and mired in sensual
desire, and I don't truly understand the escape from sensual desire that
has arisen. Venerable, please teach me how to give up sensual desire.'
Then that esteemed mendicant teaches them how to give up sensual desire.
This is the first occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in ill will ... This is the second occasion for going to see an
esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in dullness and drowsiness ... This is the third occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in restlessness and remorse ... This is the fourth occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in doubt ... This is the fifth occasion for going to see an
esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant doesn't understand what
kind of meditation they need to focus on in order to end the defilements
in the present life. On that occasion they should go to an esteemed
mendicant and say: 'I don't understand what kind of meditation to focus
on in order to end the defilements in the present life. Venerable,
please teach me how to end the defilements.' Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to end the defilements. This is the sixth
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

These are the six occasions for going to see an esteemed mendicant."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.28 Proper Occasions (2nd)  *Dutiyasamayasutta*

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the
deer park at Isipatana. Then after the meal, on their return from
almsround, this discussion came up among them while sitting together in
the pavilion.

"Reverends, how many occasions are there for going to see an esteemed
mendicant?"

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Reverends, there's a time after an esteemed mendicant's meal when they
return from almsround. Having washed their feet they sit down
cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. That is the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time the fatigue from walking and from eating has
not faded away. There's a time late in the afternoon when an esteemed
mendicant comes out of retreat. They sit cross-legged in the shade of
their porch , set their body straight, and establish mindfulness in
their presence. That is the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time they are still practicing the same
meditation subject as a basis of immersion that they focused on during
the day. There's a time when an esteemed mendicant has risen at the
crack of dawn. They sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence. That is the proper occasion for
going to see an esteemed mendicant."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to that mendicant:

"Reverend, that's not the proper occasion for going to see an esteemed
mendicant. For at that time their body is full of vitality and they find
it easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas."

When this was said, Venerable Mahākaccāna said to those
senior mendicants:

"Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'Mendicants, there are six occasions for going to see an esteemed
mendicant.

What six? Firstly, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome
and mired in sensual desire, and they don't truly understand the escape
from sensual desire that has arisen. On that occasion they should go to
an esteemed mendicant and say:

"My heart is overcome and mired in sensual desire, and I don't truly
understand the escape from sensual desire that has arisen. Venerable,
please teach me how to give up sensual desire." Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to give up sensual desire. This is the first
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant's heart is overcome and
mired in ill will ... dullness and drowsiness ... restlessness and
remorse ... doubt ...

Furthermore, there's a time when a mendicant doesn't understand what
kind of meditation they need to focus on in order to end the defilements
in the present life. On that occasion they should go to an esteemed
mendicant and say, "I don't understand what kind of meditation to focus
on in order to end the defilements in the present life. Venerable,
please teach me how to end the defilements." Then that esteemed
mendicant teaches them how to end the defilements. This is the sixth
occasion for going to see an esteemed mendicant.'

Reverends, I have heard and learned this in the presence of the Buddha:
'These are the six occasions for going to see an esteemed mendicant.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 6.29 With Udāyī  *Udāyīsutta*

Then the Buddha said to Udāyī, "Udāyī, how
many topics for recollection are there?"

When he said this, Udāyī kept silent.

And a second time ... and a third time, the Buddha said to him,
"Udāyī, how many topics for recollection are there?"

And a second time and a third time Udāyī kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda said to Venerable Udāyī, "Reverend
Udāyī, the teacher is addressing you."

"Reverend Ānanda, I hear the Buddha.

It's when a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
This is a topic for recollection."

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Ānanda: "Ānanda, I know that this
futile man Udāyī is not committed to the higher mind.
Ānanda, how many topics for recollection are there?"

"Sir, there are five topics for recollection. What five?

Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption
... second absorption ... third absorption. When this topic of
recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to
blissful meditation in this very life.

Furthermore, a mendicant focuses on the perception of light, focusing on
the perception of day regardless of whether it's night or day. And so,
with an open and unenveloped heart, they develop a mind that's full of
radiance. When this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in
this way it leads to knowledge and vision.

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of filth. 'In this body there is head hair, body hair,
nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food,
feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva,
snot, synovial fluid, urine.' When this topic of recollection is
developed and cultivated in this way it leads to giving up sensual
desire.

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse thrown in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and festering. They'd compare it with their own body:
'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go
beyond that.'

Or suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel ground being
devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, and many kinds of
little creatures. They'd compare it with their own body: 'This body is
also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot go beyond that.'

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse thrown in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ... A
skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ... A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews
... Bones rid of sinews scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone, there a thigh-bone, here a
hip-bone, there a rib-bone, here a back-bone, there an arm-bone, here a
neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there the skull ... White
bones, the color of shells ... Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...
Bones rotted and crumbled to powder. They'd compare it with their own
body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and cannot
go beyond that.' When this topic of recollection is developed and
cultivated in this way it leads to uprooting the conceit 'I am'.

Furthermore, a mendicant, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. When
this topic of recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it
leads to the penetration of many elements. These are the five topics for
recollection."

"Good, good, Ānanda. Well then, Ānanda, you should also remember this
sixth topic for recollection. In this case, a mendicant goes out
mindfully, returns mindfully, stands mindfully, sits mindfully, lies
down mindfully, and focuses on work mindfully. When this topic of
recollection is developed and cultivated in this way it leads to
mindfulness and situational awareness."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.30 Unsurpassable  *Anuttariyasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things are unsurpassable. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection.

And what is the unsurpassable seeing? Some people go to see an
elephant-treasure, a horse-treasure, a jewel-treasure, or a diverse
spectrum of sights; or ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong
practice. There is such a seeing, I don't deny it. That seeing is low,
crude, ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. The unsurpassable seeing is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, goes to see a Realized One or their
disciple. This is in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow
and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system,
and to realize extinguishment. This is called the unsurpassable seeing.
Such is the unsurpassable seeing.

But what of the unsurpassable hearing? Some people go to hear the sound
of drums, arched harps, singing, or a diverse spectrum of sounds; or
ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such a
hearing, I don't deny it. That hearing ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable hearing is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, goes to hear the teaching of a
Realized One or one of his disciples. ... This is called the
unsurpassable hearing. Such is the unsurpassable seeing and hearing.

But what of the unsurpassable acquisition? Some people acquire a child,
a wife, wealth, or a diverse spectrum of things; or they acquire faith
in an ascetic or brahmin of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such
an acquisition, I don't deny it. That acquisition ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable acquisition is when someone with
settled faith and love, sure and devoted, acquires faith in a Realized
One or their disciple. ... This is called the unsurpassable acquisition.
Such is the unsurpassable seeing, hearing, and acquisition.

But what of the unsurpassable training? Some people train in elephant
riding, horse riding, chariot driving, archery, swordsmanship, or a
diverse spectrum of things; or they train under an ascetic or brahmin of
wrong view and wrong practice. There is such a training, I don't deny
it. That training ... doesn't lead to extinguishment. The unsurpassable
training is when someone with settled faith and love, sure and devoted,
trains in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the higher wisdom in
the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. ... This is
called the unsurpassable training. Such is the unsurpassable seeing,
hearing, acquisition, and training.

But what of the unsurpassable service? Some people serve an aristocrat,
a brahmin, a householder, or a diverse spectrum of people; or they serve
ascetics and brahmins of wrong view and wrong practice. There is such
service, I don't deny it. That service ... doesn't lead to
extinguishment. The unsurpassable service is when someone with settled
faith and love, sure and devoted, serves a Realized One or their
disciple. ... This is called the unsurpassable service. Such is the
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, and service.

But what of the unsurpassable recollection? Some people recollect a
child, a wife, wealth, or a diverse spectrum of things; or they
recollect an ascetic or brahmin of wrong view and wrong practice. There
is such recollection, I don't deny it. That recollection is low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. It doesn't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
The unsurpassable recollection is when someone with settled faith and
love, sure and devoted, recollects a Realized One or their disciple. ...
This is called the unsurpassable recollection.

These are the six unsurpassable things.

> They've gained the unsurpassed seeing,\
> the unsurpassed hearing,\
> and the unsurpassable acquisition.\
> They enjoy the unsurpassable training
>
> and serve with care.\
> Then they develop recollection\
> connected with seclusion,\
> which is safe, and leads to freedom from death.
>
> They rejoice in diligence,\
> alert and ethically restrained.\
> And in time they arrive\
> at the place where suffering ceases."

## The Chapter on Deities

### N 6.31 A Trainee  *Sekhasutta*

"These six things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What six?
They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don't guard the sense
doors, and they eat too much. These six things lead to the decline of a
mendicant trainee.

These six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
six? They don't relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They guard the
sense doors, and they don't eat too much. These six things don't lead to
the decline of a mendicant trainee."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.32 Non-decline (1st)  *Paṭhamaaparihānasutta*

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What
six? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the
Saṅgha, for the training, for diligence, and for
hospitality. These six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha told the mendicants all that
had happened, adding:

> "Respect for the Teacher and the teaching,\
> and keen respect for the Saṅgha;\
> a mendicant who respects diligence\
> and hospitality\
> can't decline,\
> and has drawn near to extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.33 Non-decline (2nd)  *Dutiyaaparihānasutta*

"Tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's Grove, came to
me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What six? Respect for the
Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the
training, for conscience, and for prudence. These six things don't lead
to the decline of a mendicant.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there.

> One respectful of the Teacher and the teaching,\
> keenly respecting the Saṅgha;\
> endowed with conscience and prudence,\
> reverential and respectful---\
> it is impossible for them to decline;\
> they have drawn near to extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.34 With Mahāmoggallāna  *Mahāmoggallānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then as Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was in private retreat
this thought came to his mind, "Which gods know that they are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

Now, at that time a monk called Tissa had recently passed away and been
reborn in a realm of divinity. There they knew that The divinity Tissa
was very mighty and powerful.

And then Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, as easily as a strong
person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from Jeta's Grove
and reappeared in that realm of divinity.

Tissa saw Moggallāna coming off in the distance, and said
to him, "Come, my good Moggallāna! Welcome, my good
Moggallāna! It's been a long time since you took the
opportunity to come here. Sit, my good Moggallāna, this
seat is for you." Moggallāna sat down on the seat spread
out. Then Tissa bowed to Moggallāna and sat to one side.

Moggallāna said to him, "Tissa, which gods know that they
are stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound
for awakening?"

"The gods of the four great kings know this."

"But do all of them know this?"

"No, my good Moggallāna, not all of them. Those who lack
experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha, and lack the ethics loved by the noble ones, do not
know that they are stream-enterers. But those who have experiential
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and
have the ethics loved by the noble ones, do know that they are
stream-enterers."

"But Tissa, is it only the gods of the four great kings who know that
they are stream-enterers, or do the gods of the thirty-three ... the
gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ...
and the gods who control what is imagined by others know that they are
stream-enterers, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening?"

"The gods of these various classes know this."

"But do all of them know this?"

"No, my good Moggallāna, not all of them. Those who lack
experiential confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha, and lack the ethics loved by the noble ones, do not
know that they are stream-enterers. But those who have experiential
confidence in the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and
have the ethics loved by the noble ones, do know that they are
stream-enterers."

Moggallāna approved and agreed with what the divinity Tissa
said. Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their
arm, he vanished from that realm of divinity and reappeared in Jeta's
Grove.

<!--pg-->
### N 6.35 Things That Play a Part in Realization  *Vijjābhāgiyasutta*

"These six things play a part in realization. What six? The perception
of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence, the
perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up, the
perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation. These are
the six things that play a part in realization."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.36 Roots of Arguments  *Vivādamūlasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six roots of arguments. What six? Firstly,
a mendicant is irritable and acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha, and they don't fulfill the training. They create a
dispute in the Saṅgha, which is for the detriment and
suffering of the people, against the people, for the harm, detriment,
and suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a root of arguments in
yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad thing. If you
don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come up in the
future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so it doesn't
come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... devious and deceitful ... with corrupt wishes and
wrong view ... They're attached to their own views, holding them tight,
and refusing to let go. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for
the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don't
fulfill the training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha,
which is for the detriment and unhappiness of the people, against the
people, for the harm, detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If
you see such a root of arguments in yourselves or others, you should try
to give up this bad thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so
that it doesn't come up in the future. That's how to give up this bad
root of arguments, so it doesn't come up in the future. These are the
six roots of arguments."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.37 A Gift With Six Factors  *Chaḷaṅgadānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother, was preparing
a religious donation with six factors for the mendicant
Saṅgha headed by Sāriputta and
Moggallāna. The Buddha saw her doing this, with his
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, and he addressed the
mendicants:

"This Veḷukaṇṭakī, Nanda's mother, is preparing a religious
donation with six factors for the mendicant Saṅgha headed
by Sāriputta and Moggallāna.

And how does a religious donation have six factors? Three factors apply
to the donor and three to the recipients.

What three factors apply to the donor? It's when a donor is in a good
mood before giving, while giving they feel confident, and after giving
they're uplifted. These three factors apply to the donor.

What three factors apply to the recipients? It's when the recipients are
free of greed, hate, and delusion, or practicing to be free of them.
These three factors apply to the recipients.

Thus three factors apply to the donor and three to the recipients.
That's how a religious donation has six factors.

It's not easy to grasp the merit of such a six-factored donation by
saying that this is the extent of their overflowing merit, overflowing
goodness that nurtures happiness and is conducive to heaven, ripening in
happiness and leading to heaven. And it leads to what is likable,
desirable, agreeable, to welfare and happiness. It's simply reckoned as
an incalculable, immeasurable, great mass of merit.

It's like trying to grasp how much water is in the ocean. It's not easy
to say how many gallons, how many hundreds, thousands, hundreds of
thousands of gallons there are. It's simply reckoned as an incalculable,
immeasurable, great mass of water. In the same way, it's not easy to
grasp the merit of such a six-factored donation ...

> A good mood before giving,\
> confidence while giving,\
> feeling uplifted after giving:\
> this is the perfect sacrifice.
>
> Free of greed, free of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled;\
> this is the field for the perfect sacrifice,\
> the disciplined spiritual practitioners.
>
> After rinsing,\
> you give with your own hands.\
> This sacrifice is very fruitful\
> for both yourself and others.
>
> When an intelligent, faithful person,\
> sacrifices like this, with a mind of letting go,\
> that astute one is reborn\
> in a happy, pleasing world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.38 One's Own Volition  *Attakārīsutta*

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, this is my doctrine and view: One does not act of one's
own volition, nor does one act of another's volition."

"Brahmin, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view! How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that
one does not act of one's own volition, nor does one act of another's
volition?

What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of initiative?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who initiate activity?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since there is an element of initiative, and sentient beings who
initiate activity are found, sentient beings act of their own volition
or that of another.

What do you think, brahmin, is there an element of persistence ...
exertion ... strength ... endurance ... energy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since this is so, do we find sentient beings who have energy?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since there is an element of energy, and sentient beings who have
energy are found, sentient beings act of their own volition or that of
another.

Brahmin, may I never see or hear of anyone holding such a doctrine or
view! How on earth can someone who comes and goes on his own say that
one does not act of one's own volition, nor does one act of another's
volition?"

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.39 Sources  *Nidānasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Greed, hate, and delusion are sources that give rise to deeds.
Greed doesn't give rise to contentment. Rather, greed just gives rise to
greed. Hate doesn't give rise to love. Rather, hate just gives rise to
hate. Delusion doesn't give rise to understanding. Rather, delusion just
gives rise to delusion. It's not because of deeds born of greed, hate,
and delusion that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are
found. Rather, it's because of deeds born of greed, hate, and delusion
that hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places
are found. These are three sources that give rise to deeds.

Mendicants, there are these three sources that give rise to deeds. What
three? Contentment, love, and understanding are sources that give rise
to deeds. Contentment doesn't give rise to greed. Rather, contentment
just gives rise to contentment. Love doesn't give rise to hate. Rather,
love just gives rise to love. Understanding doesn't give rise to
delusion. Rather, understanding just gives rise to understanding. It's
not because of deeds born of contentment, love, and understanding that
hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, or any other bad places are
found. Rather, it's because of deeds born of contentment, love, and
understanding that gods, humans, or those in any other good places are
found. These are three sources that give rise to deeds."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.40 With Kimbila  *Kimilasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kimbilā in the Freshwater Mangrove Wood. Then Venerable
Kimbila went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
not last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen lack respect
and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
the training, diligence, and hospitality after the final quenching of
the Realized One. This is the cause, this is the reason why the true
teaching does not last long after the final quenching of the Realized
One."

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the true teaching does
last long after the final quenching of the Realized One?"

"Kimbila, it's when the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen maintain
respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, diligence, and hospitality after the
final quenching of the Realized One. This is the cause, this is the
reason why the true teaching does last long after the final quenching of
the Realized One."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.41 A Tree Trunk  *Dārukkhandhasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time Venerable
Sāriputta was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then Venerable Sāriputta robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, descended the Vulture's Peak together with
several mendicants. At a certain spot he saw a large tree trunk, and he
addressed the mendicants, "Reverends, do you see this large tree trunk?"

"Yes, reverend."

"If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has mastered
their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but earth. Why
is that? Because the earth element exists in the tree trunk. Relying on
that a mendicant with psychic powers could determine it to be nothing
but earth. If they wanted to, a mendicant with psychic powers who has
mastered their mind could determine this tree trunk to be nothing but
water. ... Or they could determine it to be nothing but fire ... Or they
could determine it to be nothing but air ... Or they could determine it
to be nothing but beautiful ... Or they could determine it to be nothing
but ugly. Why is that? Because the element of ugliness exists in the
tree trunk. Relying on that a mendicant with psychic powers could
determine it to be nothing but ugly."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.42 With Nāgita  *Nāgitasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Icchānaṅgala. He stayed in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of
Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a
forest near Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods,
Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to others. He
proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased; and he explains a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to see such
perfected ones." Then, when the night had passed, they took many fresh
and cooked foods and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala,
where they stood outside the gates making a dreadful racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's
attendant. Then the Buddha said to Nāgita,
"Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd think it
was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala.
They've brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing
outside the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the
mendicant Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

Take a mendicant living within a village who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now a monastery worker, a
novice, or a fellow practitioner will make this venerable fall from
immersion.' So I'm not pleased that that mendicant is living within a
village.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting nodding in
meditation. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable, having dispelled
that sleepiness and weariness, will focus just on the unified perception
of wilderness.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is living in the
wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting without being
immersed in samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now if this
venerable's mind is not immersed in samādhi they will
immerse it, or if it is immersed in samādhi, they will
preserve it.' So I'm pleased that that mendicant is living in the
wilderness.

Take a mendicant in the wilderness who I see sitting immersed in
samādhi. I think to myself: 'Now this venerable will free
the unfreed mind or preserve the freed mind.' So I'm pleased that that
mendicant is living in the wilderness.

Take a mendicant who I see living within a village receiving robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Enjoying
possessions, honor, and popularity they neglect retreat, and they
neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. They come down
to villages, towns, and capital cities and make their home there. So I'm
not pleased that that mendicant is living within a village.

Take a mendicant who I see in the wilderness receiving robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. Fending off
possessions, honor, and popularity they don't neglect retreat, and they
don't neglect remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. So I'm
pleased that that mendicant is living in the wilderness.

Nāgita, when I'm walking along a road and I don't see
anyone ahead or behind I feel relaxed, even if I need to urinate or
defecate."

## The Chapter with Dhammika

### N 6.43 The Giant  *Nāgasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then, after the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Ānanda, "Come, Ānanda,
let's go to the stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the
Eastern Monastery for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied.

So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the Eastern Monastery. In the late
afternoon the Buddha came out of retreat and addressed Ānanda, "Come,
Ānanda, let's go to the eastern gate to bathe."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. So the Buddha went with Ānanda to the
eastern gate to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged from the water he
stood in one robe drying his limbs.

Now, at that time King Pasenadi had a giant bull elephant called
"White". It emerged from the eastern gate to the beating and playing of
musical instruments.

When people saw it they said, "The royal giant is so handsome! The royal
giant is so good-looking! The royal giant is so lovely! The royal giant
has such a huge body!"

When they said this, Venerable Udāyī said to the Buddha,
"Sir, is it only when they see elephants with such a huge, formidable
body that people say: 'A giant, such a giant'? Or do they say it when
they see any other creatures with huge, formidable bodies?"

"Udāyī, when they see elephants with such a huge,
formidable body people say: 'A giant, such a giant!'

And also when they see a horse with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a bull with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a serpent with a huge, formidable body ...

When they see a tree with a huge, formidable body ...

And when they see a human being with such a huge, formidable body people
say: 'A giant, such a giant!'

But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way of body,
speech, and mind is who I call a 'giant' in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans."

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well said this was by the
Buddha: 'But Udāyī, one who does nothing monstrous by way
of body, speech, and mind is who I call a "giant" in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.' And I celebrate the
well-spoken words of the Buddha with these verses:

> Awakened as a human being,\
> self-tamed and immersed in samādhi,\
> following the spiritual path,\
> he loves peace of mind.
>
> Revered by people,\
> gone beyond all things,\
> even the gods revere him;\
> so I've heard from the perfected one.
>
> He has transcended all fetters\
> and escaped from entanglements.\
> Delighting to renounce sensual pleasures,\
> he's freed like lustrous gold from stone.
>
> That giant outshines all,\
> like the Himalaya beside other mountains.\
> Of all those named 'giant',\
> he is truly named, supreme.
>
> I shall extol the giant for you,\
> for he does nothing monstrous.\
> Sweetness and harmlessness\
> are two feet of the giant.
>
> Fervor and celibacy\
> are his two other feet.\
> Faith is the giant's trunk,\
> and equanimity his white tusks.
>
> Mindfulness is his neck, his head is wisdom---\
> inquiry and thinking about principles.\
> His belly is the sacred hearth of the Dhamma,\
> and his tail is seclusion.
>
> Practicing absorption, enjoying the breath,\
> he is serene within.\
> The giant is serene when walking,\
> the giant is serene when standing,
>
> the giant is serene when lying down,\
> and when sitting, the giant is serene.\
> The giant is restrained everywhere:\
> this is the accomplishment of the giant.
>
> He eats blameless things,\
> he doesn't eat blameworthy things.\
> When he gets food and clothes,\
> he avoids storing them up.
>
> Having severed all bonds,\
> fetters large and small,\
> wherever he goes,\
> he goes without concern.
>
> A white lotus,\
> fragrant and delightful,\
> sprouts in water and grows there,\
> but water does not stick to it.
>
> Just so the Buddha is born in the world,\
> and lives in the world,\
> but the world does not stick to him,\
> as water does not stick to the lotus.
>
> A great blazing fire\
> dies down when the fuel runs out.\
> When the coals have gone out\
> it's said to be 'quenched'.
>
> This simile is taught by the discerning\
> to express the meaning clearly.\
> Great giants will understand\
> what the giant taught the giant.
>
> Free of greed, free of hate,\
> free of delusion, undefiled;\
> the giant, giving up his body,\
> being undefiled, will be fully quenched."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.44 With Migasālā  *Migasālāsutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and
robe, went to the home of the laywoman Migasālā, where he
sat on the seat spread out.

Then the laywoman Migasālā went up to Ānanda, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him, "Honorable Ānanda, how on earth are
we supposed to understand the teaching taught by the Buddha, when the
chaste and the unchaste are both reborn in exactly the same place in the
next life?

My father Purāṇa was celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of sex. When he passed away the Buddha declared that, since
he was a once-returner, he was reborn in the host of joyful gods.

But my uncle Isidatta was not celibate; he lived content with his wife.
When he passed away the Buddha declared that, since he was also a
once-returner, he was reborn in the host of joyful gods.

How on earth are we supposed to understand the teaching taught by the
Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both reborn in exactly the
same place in the next life?"

"You're right, sister, but that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Ānanda, after receiving almsfood at Migasālā's home,
rose from his seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from
almsround, Ānanda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what had happened.

"Ānanda, who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish
incompetent aunty, with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to
assess individuals? These six people are found in the world. What six?

Take a certain person who is sweet-natured and pleasant to be with. And
spiritual companions enjoy living together with them. And they've not
listened or learned or comprehended theoretically or found even
temporary freedom. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're going to a lower place,
not a higher.

Take another person who is sweet-natured and pleasant to be with. And
spiritual companions enjoy living together with them. And they've
listened and learned and comprehended theoretically and found temporary
freedom. When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a
higher place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is sweet-natured ... and has listened,
learned, comprehended theoretically, and found temporary freedom is
better and finer than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream
of the teaching carries them along. But who knows the difference between
them except a Realized One?

So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass judgment on
people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves. I, or someone
like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has greedy thoughts. And they've not listened or learned or comprehended
theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're
going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has greedy thoughts. ... Because the stream of the teaching carries them
along. ... When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a
higher place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ...

I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has the impulse to speak inappropriately. And they've not listened or
learned or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower
place, not a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take another person who is angry and conceited, and from time to time
has the impulse to speak inappropriately. But they've listened and
learned and comprehended theoretically and found temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is angry and conceited, but has listened,
learned, comprehended theoretically, and found temporary freedom is
better and finer than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream
of the teaching carries them along. But who knows the difference between
them except a Realized One?

So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass judgment on
people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves. I, or someone
like me, may pass judgment on people.

Who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty,
with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals?
These six people are found in the world.

If Isidatta had achieved Purāṇa's level of ethical conduct,
Purāṇa could not have even known Isidatta's destination.
And if Purāṇa had achieved Isidatta's level of wisdom,
Isidatta could not have even known Purāṇa's destination. So
both individuals were lacking in one respect."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.45 Debt  *Iṇasutta*

"Mendicants, isn't poverty suffering in the world for a person who
enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor, penniless person falls into debt, isn't being in debt also
suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person who has fallen into debt agrees to pay interest,
isn't the interest also suffering in the world for a person who enjoys
sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person who has fallen into debt and agreed to pay interest
fails to pay it when it falls due, they get a warning. Isn't being
warned suffering in the world for a person who enjoys sensual
pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person fails to pay after getting a warning, they're
prosecuted. Isn't being prosecuted suffering in the world for a person
who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"When a poor person fails to pay after being prosecuted, they're
imprisoned. Isn't being imprisoned suffering in the world for a person
who enjoys sensual pleasures?"

"Yes, sir."

"So mendicants, poverty, debt, interest, warnings, prosecution, and
imprisonment are suffering in the world for those who enjoy sensual
pleasures. In the same way, whoever has no faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom when it comes to skillful qualities is called poor
and penniless in the training of the Noble One.

Since they have no faith, conscience, prudence, energy, or wisdom when
it comes to skillful qualities, they do bad things by way of body,
speech, and mind. This is how they're in debt, I say.

In order to conceal the bad things they do by way of body, speech, and
mind they harbor corrupt wishes. They wish, plan, speak, and act with
the thought: 'May no-one find me out!' This is how they pay interest, I
say.

Good-hearted spiritual companions say this about them: 'This venerable
acts like this, and behaves like that.' This is how they're warned, I
say.

When they go to a wilderness, the root of a tree, or an empty hut,
they're beset by remorseful, unskillful thoughts. This is how they're
prosecuted, I say.

That poor, penniless person has done bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're trapped in the
prison of hell or the animal realm. I don't see a single prison that's
as brutal, as vicious, and such an obstacle to reaching the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke as the prison of hell or the animal realm.

> Poverty is said to be suffering in the world,\
> and so is being in debt.\
> A poor person who has fallen into debt\
> frets even when spending the loan.
>
> And then they're prosecuted,\
> or even thrown in jail.\
> Such imprisonment is true suffering\
> for someone who prays for pleasure and possessions.
>
> In the same way, in the noble one's training\
> whoever has no faith,\
> no conscience or prudence,\
> contemplates bad deeds.
>
> After doing bad things\
> by way of body,\
> speech, and mind,\
> they wish, 'May no-one find me out!'
>
> Their behavior is creepy\
> by body, speech, and mind.\
> They pile up bad deeds\
> on and on, life after life.
>
> That simpleton evildoer,\
> knowing their own misdeeds,\
> is a poor person who has fallen into debt,\
> and frets even when spending the loan.
>
> And when in village or wilderness\
> they're prosecuted\
> by painful mental plans,\
> which are born of remorse.
>
> That simpleton evildoer,\
> knowing their own misdeeds,\
> goes to one of the animal realms,\
> or is trapped in hell.
>
> Such imprisonment is true suffering,\
> from which the attentive are released.\
> With confident heart, they give\
> with wealth that is properly earned.
>
> That faithful householder\
> holds a perfect hand on both counts:\
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity.
>
> In the same way, in the noble one's training,\
> whoever is grounded in faith,\
> with conscience and prudence,\
> wise, and ethically restrained,
>
> is said to live happily\
> in the noble one's training.\
> After gaining pleasure not of the flesh,\
> they concentrate on equanimity.
>
> They give up the five hindrances,\
> constantly energetic,\
> and enter the absorptions,\
> unified, alert, and mindful.
>
> Truly knowing in this way\
> regards the ending of all fetters,\
> by not grasping in any way,\
> their mind is rightly freed.
>
> To that unaffected one, rightly freed\
> with the end of the fetters of continued existence,\
> the knowledge comes:\
> 'My freedom is unshakable.'
>
> This is the ultimate knowledge.\
> This is the supreme happiness.\
> Sorrowless, stainless, secure:\
> this is the highest freedom from debt."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.46 By Mahācunda  *Mahācundasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time Venerable
Mahācunda was staying in the land of the Cetis at
Sahajāti. There he addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahācunda said this:

"Take a case where mendicants who practice discernment of principles
rebuke mendicants who practice absorption meditation: 'They say, "We
practice absorption meditation! We practice absorption meditation!" And
they meditate and concentrate and contemplate and ruminate. Why do they
practice absorption meditation? In what way do they practice absorption
meditation? How do they practice absorption meditation?' In this case
the mendicants who practice discernment of principles are not inspired,
and the mendicants who practice absorption meditation are not inspired.
And they're not acting for the welfare and happiness of the people, for
the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

Now, take a case where mendicants who practice absorption meditation
rebuke mendicants who practice discernment of principles: 'They say, "We
practice discernment of principles! We practice discernment of
principles!" But they're restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous,
loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion,
with straying minds and undisciplined faculties. Why do they practice
discernment of principles? In what way do they practice discernment of
principles? How do they practice discernment of principles?' In this
case the mendicants who practice absorption meditation are not inspired,
and the mendicants who practice discernment of principles are not
inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare and happiness of the
people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.

Now, take a case where mendicants who practice discernment of principles
praise only others like them, not mendicants who practice absorption
meditation. In this case the mendicants who practice discernment of
principles are not inspired, and the mendicants who practice absorption
meditation are not inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare and
happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare, and
happiness of gods and humans.

And take a case where mendicants who practice absorption meditation
praise only others like them, not mendicants who practice discernment of
principles. In this case the mendicants who practice absorption
meditation are not inspired, and the mendicants who practice discernment
of principles are not inspired. And they're not acting for the welfare
and happiness of the people, for the people, for the benefit, welfare,
and happiness of gods and humans.

So you should train like this: 'As mendicants who practice discernment
of principles, we will praise mendicants who practice absorption
meditation.' That's how you should train. Why is that? Because it's
incredibly rare to find individuals in the world who have direct
meditative experience of the element free of death.

So you should train like this: 'As mendicants who practice absorption
meditation, we will praise mendicants who practice discernment of
principles.' That's how you should train. Why is that? Because it's
incredibly rare to find individuals in the world who see the meaning of
a deep saying with penetrating wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.47 Apparent in the Present Life (1st)  *Paṭhamasandiṭṭhikasutta*

And then the wanderer Moḷiyasīvaka went up to the Buddha,
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'. In what
way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves?"

"Well then, Sīvaka, I'll ask you about this in return, and
you can answer as you like. What do you think, Sīvaka? When
there's greed in you, do you understand 'I have greed in me'? And when
there's no greed in you, do you understand 'I have no greed in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves.

What do you think, Sīvaka? When there's hate ... delusion
... greedy ideas ... hateful ideas ... When there are delusional ideas
in you, do you understand 'I have delusional ideas in me'? And when
there are no delusional ideas in you, do you understand 'I have no
delusional ideas in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, sir! Excellent! From this day forth, may the Buddha remember
me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.48 Apparent in the Present Life (2nd)  *Dutiyasandiṭṭhikasutta*

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'.
In what way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves?"

"Well then, brahmin, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can
answer as you like. What do you think, brahmin? When there's greed in
you, do you understand 'I have greed in me'? And when there's no greed
in you, do you understand 'I have no greed in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves.

What do you think, brahmin? When there's hate ... delusion ...
corruption that leads to physical deeds ... corruption that leads to
speech ... When there's corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do
you understand 'I have corruption that leads to mental deeds in me'? And
when there's no corruption that leads to mental deeds in you, do you
understand 'I have no corruption that leads to mental deeds in me'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Since you know this, this is how the teaching is apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know it for themselves."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.49 With Khema  *Khemasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Khema and Venerable Sumana were staying near
Sāvatthī in the Dark Forest. Then they went up to the
Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. Venerable Khema said to the
Buddha:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---does
not think: 'There is someone better than me, or equal to me, or worse
than me.'"

That is what Khema said, and the teacher approved. Then Khema, knowing
that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

And then, not long after Khema had left, Sumana said to the Buddha:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---does
not think: 'There is no-one better than me, or equal to me, or worse
than me.'"

That is what Sumana said, and the teacher approved. Then Sumana, knowing
that the teacher approved, got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

And then, soon after Khema and Sumana had left, the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, this is how gentlemen declare enlightenment.
The goal is spoken of, but the self is not involved. But it seems that
there are some futile men here who declare enlightenment as a joke.
Later they will fall into distress.

> They don't represent themselves\
> as being among superiors, inferiors, or equals.\
> Rebirth is ended,\
> \>the spiritual journey has been completed.\
> They live freed from fetters."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.50 Sense Restraint  *Indriyasaṁvarasutta*

"Mendicants, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. ... One
who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a vital condition
for knowledge and vision of freedom.

When there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled sense restraint has
fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. When there is ethical
conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled
sense restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. ...
One who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.51 With Ānanda  *Ānandasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to Venerable Sāriputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Ānanda sat down to one side, and said to
Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, how does a mendicant get to hear a
teaching they haven't heard before? How do they remember those teachings
they have heard? How do they keep exercising the teachings with which
they are already familiar? And how do they come to understand what they
haven't understood before?"

"Well, Venerable Ānanda, you're very learned. Why don't you clarify this
yourself?"

"Well then, Reverend Sāriputta, listen and apply your mind
well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," Sāriputta replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverend Sāriputta, take a mendicant who memorizes the
teaching---statements, mixed prose & verse, discussions, verses,
inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past lives, amazing stories,
and elaborations.

Then, just as they learned and memorized it, they teach others in
detail, make them recite in detail, practice reciting in detail, and
think about and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with
the mind.

They enter the rains retreat in a monastery with senior mendicants who
are very learned, inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the
teachings, the monastic law, and the outlines. From time to time they go
up to those mendicants and ask them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say
this? What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear,
reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful
matters.

This is how a mendicant gets to hear a teaching they haven't heard
before. It's how they remember those teachings they have heard. It's how
they keep exercising the teachings with which they are already familiar.
And it's how they come to understand what they haven't understood
before."

"It's incredible, reverend, it's amazing! How well said this was by
Venerable Ānanda! And we will remember Venerable Ānanda as someone who
has these six qualities.

For Ānanda memorizes the teaching ... statements, mixed prose & verse,
discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past
lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. Those venerables clarify to
Ānanda what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt
regarding the many doubtful matters."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.52 Aristocrats  *Khattiyasutta*

And then the brahmin Jānussoṇi went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Aristocrats, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Aristocrats, brahmin, have wealth as their ambition. They're
preoccupied with wisdom. They're fixated on power. They insist on
territory. Their ultimate goal is authority."

"Brahmins, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Brahmins have wealth as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
wisdom. They're fixated on the hymns. They insist on sacrifice. Their
ultimate goal is the realm of divinity."

"Householders, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Householders have wealth as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
wisdom. They're fixated on their profession. They insist on work. Their
ultimate goal is to complete their work."

"Women, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Women have a man as their ambition. They're preoccupied with
adornments. They're fixated on their children. They insist on being
without a co-wife. Their ultimate goal is authority."

"Bandits, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Bandits have theft as their ambition. They're preoccupied with a hiding
place. They're fixated on their sword. They insist on darkness. Their
ultimate goal is invisibility."

"Ascetics, Mister Gotama, have what as their ambition? What is their
preoccupation? What are they fixated on? What do they insist on? What is
their ultimate goal?"

"Ascetics have patience and sweetness as their ambition. They're
preoccupied with wisdom. They're fixated on ethical conduct. They insist
on owning nothing. Their ultimate goal is extinguishment."

"It's incredible, Mister Gotama, it's amazing! Mister Gotama knows the
ambition, preoccupation, fixation, insistence, and ultimate goal of
aristocrats, brahmins, householders, women, bandits, and ascetics.
Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may Mister
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.53 Diligence  *Appamādasutta*

Then a certain brahmin went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat
down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, is there one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
secures benefits for both this life and lives to come?"

"There is, brahmin."

"So what is it?"

"Diligence, brahmin, is one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
secures benefits for both this life and lives to come.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint. So an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and
cultivated, secures benefits for both this life and lives to come.

The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and
meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In
the same way, diligence is one thing ...

A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes
them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. In the same way,
diligence is one thing ...

When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to
the stalk will follow along. In the same way, diligence is one thing ...

All lesser rulers are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the
same way, diligence is one thing ...

The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. In the same way, diligence is one thing that, when developed and
cultivated, secures benefits for both this life and lives to come.

This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, secures
benefits for both this life and lives to come."

"Excellent, Mister Gotama! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may
Mister Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.54 About Dhammika  *Dhammikasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time Venerable Dhammika was a resident in all seven
monasteries of his native land. There he abused visiting mendicants; he
insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed them. The visiting mendicants
who were treated in this way did not stay. They left, abandoning the
monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "We have supplied
the mendicant Saṅgha with robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. But the visiting mendicants don't
stay. They leave, abandoning the monastery. What is the cause, what is
the reason for this?"

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "This Venerable
Dhammika abuses visiting mendicants; he insults, harms, attacks, and
harasses them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way do
not stay. They leave, abandoning the monastery. Why don't we banish
Venerable Dhammika?"

Then the local lay followers went up to Venerable Dhammika and said to
him, "Sir, please leave this monastery. You've stayed here long enough."

Then Venerable Dhammika left and went to another monastery. There he
abused visiting mendicants; he insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed
them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way did not stay.
They left, abandoning the monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves: ...

They said to Venerable Dhammika, "Sir, please leave this monastery.
You've stayed here long enough."

Then Venerable Dhammika left and went to another monastery. There he
abused visiting mendicants; he insulted, harmed, attacked, and harassed
them. The visiting mendicants who were treated in this way did not stay.
They left, abandoning the monastery.

Then the local lay followers thought to themselves, "Why don't we banish
Venerable Dhammika from all seven monasteries in our native land?"

Then the local lay followers went up to Venerable Dhammika and said to
him, "Sir, please leave all seven monasteries in our native land."

Then Venerable Dhammika thought, "I've been banished by the local lay
followers from all seven monasteries in my native land. Where am I to go
now?" He thought, "Why don't I go to see the Buddha?"

Then Venerable Dhammika took his bowl and robe and set out for
Rājagaha. Eventually he came to Rājagaha and
the Vulture's Peak. He went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him, "So, Brahmin Dhammika, where have you come
from?"

"Sir, I've been banished by the local lay followers from all seven
monasteries in my native land."

"Enough, Brahmin Dhammika, what's that to you? Now that you've been
banished from all of those places, you have come to me.

Once upon a time, some sea-merchants set sail for the ocean deeps,
taking with them a land-spotting bird. When their ship was out of sight
of land, they released the bird. It flew right away to the east, the
west, the north, the south, upwards, and in-between. If it saw land on
any side, it went there and stayed. But if it saw no land on any side it
returned to the ship. In the same way, now that you've been banished
from all of those places, you have come to me.

Once upon a time, King Koravya had a royal banyan tree with five trunks
called 'Well Planted'. It was shady and lovely. Its canopy spread over
twelve leagues, while the network of roots spread for five leagues. Its
fruits were as large as a rice pot. And they were as sweet as pure wild
honey. The king and harem made use of one trunk, the troops another, the
people of town and country another, ascetics and brahmins another, and
beasts and birds another. No-one guarded the fruit, yet no-one damaged
another's fruits.

Then a certain person ate as much as he liked of the fruit, then broke
off a branch and left. Then the deity haunting the royal banyan tree
thought, 'Oh, how incredible, how amazing! How wicked this person is, to
eat as much as they like, then break off a branch and leave! Why don't I
make sure that the royal banyan tree gives no fruit in future?' Then the
royal banyan tree gave no more fruit.

Then King Koravya went up to Sakka, lord of gods, and said to him,
'Please sir, you should know that the royal banyan tree called Well
Planted gives no fruit.' Then Sakka used his psychic powers to will that
a violent storm come. And it felled and uprooted the royal banyan tree.
Then the deity haunting the tree stood to one side, miserable and sad,
weeping, with a tearful face.

Then Sakka went up to that deity, and said, 'Why, god, are you standing
to one side, miserable and sad, weeping, with a tearful face?'

'Because, my good sir, a violent storm came and felled and uprooted my
home.'

'Well, did you stand by your tree's duty when the storm came?'

'But my good sir, how does a tree stand by its duty?'

'It's when those who need the tree's roots, bark, leaves, flowers, or
fruit take what they need. Yet the deity is not displeased or upset
because of this. This is how a tree stands by its duty.'

'I was not standing by a tree's duty when the storm came and felled and
uprooted my home.'

'God, if you were to stand by a tree's duty, your home may be as it was
before.'

'I will stand by a tree's duty! May my home be as it was before!'

Then Sakka used his psychic power to will that a violent storm come. And
it raised up that mighty banyan tree and the bark of the roots was
healed.

In the same way, Brahmin Dhammika, were you standing by an ascetic's
duty when the local lay followers banished you from all seven of the
monasteries in your native land?"

"But sir, how do I stand by an ascetic's duty?"

"When someone abuses, annoys, or argues with an ascetic, the ascetic
doesn't abuse, annoy, or argue back at them. That's how an ascetic
stands by an ascetic's duty."

"I was not standing by an ascetic's duty when the local lay followers
banished me from all seven of the monasteries in my native land."

"Once upon a time, there was a Teacher called Sunetta. He was a
religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had
many hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in the
company of Divinity. Those lacking confidence in Sunetta were---when
their body broke up, after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. Those full of confidence in Sunetta
were---when their body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.

Once upon a time there was a teacher called Mūgapakkha ...
Aranemi ... Kuddālaka ... Hatthipāla ...
Jotipāla. He was a religious founder and was free of desire
for sensual pleasures. He had many hundreds of disciples. He taught them
the way to rebirth in the company of Divinity. Those lacking confidence
in Jotipāla were---when their body broke up, after
death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Those full of confidence in Jotipāla were---when their body
broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

What do you think, Brahmin Dhammika? If someone with malicious intent
were to abuse and insult these six teachers with their hundreds of
followers, would they not create much wickedness?"

"Yes, sir."

"They would indeed. But someone who abuses and insults a single person
accomplished in view with malicious intent creates even more wickedness.
Why is that? Brahmin Dhammika, I say that any injury done by those
outside of the Buddhist community does not compare with what is done to
one's own spiritual companions. So you should train like this: 'We will
have no malicious intent for those who we want to have as our spiritual
companions.' That is how you should train.

> Sunetta and Mūgapakkha,\
> and Aranemi the brahmin,\
> Hatthipāla the student,\
> and Kuddālaka were Teachers.
>
> And Jotipāla Govinda\
> was priest for seven kings.\
> These six famous teachers,\
> harmless ones of the past,
>
> were free of putrefaction, compassionate,\
> gone beyond the fetter of sensuality.\
> Detached from sensual desire,\
> they were reborn in the realm of divinity.
>
> Many hundreds of\
> their disciples were also\
> free of putrefaction-stench, compassionate,\
> gone beyond the fetter of sensuality.\
> Detached from sensual desire,\
> they were reborn in the realm of divinity.
>
> One who insults\
> with malicious intent\
> these non-Buddhist seers,\
> free of desire, immersed in samādhi;\
> such a man\
> creates much wickedness.
>
> But one who insults\
> with malicious intent\
> a single person accomplished in view,\
> a mendicant disciple of the Buddha;\
> that man\
> creates even more wickedness.
>
> You shouldn't attack a holy person,\
> who has given up the grounds for views.\
> This person is called\
> the seventh of the noble Saṅgha.
>
> They're not free of desire for sensual pleasures,\
> and their faculties are still immature:\
> faith, mindfulness, and energy,\
> serenity and discernment.
>
> If you attack such a mendicant,\
> you first hurt yourself.\
> Having hurt yourself,\
> you harm the other.
>
> But if you protect yourself,\
> the other is also protected.\
> So you should protect yourself.\
> An astute person is always uninjured."


## The Great Chapter

### N 6.55 With Soṇa  *Soṇasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, on the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Now at that time Venerable Soṇa was staying near
Rājagaha in the Cool Grove. Then as he was in private
retreat this thought came to his mind, "I am one of the Buddha's most
energetic disciples. Yet my mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. But my family has wealth. I could enjoy that wealth and make
merit. Why don't I resign the training and return to a lesser life, so I
can enjoy my wealth and make merit?"

Then the Buddha knew what Venerable Soṇa was thinking. As
easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he
vanished from the Vulture's Peak and reappeared in the Cool Grove in
front of Soṇa, and sat on the seat spread out.
Soṇa bowed to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to him, "Soṇa, as you were in private
retreat didn't this thought come to your mind: 'I am one of the Buddha's
most energetic disciples. Yet my mind is not freed from defilements by
not grasping. But my family has wealth. I could enjoy that wealth and
make merit. Why don't I resign the training and return to a lesser life,
so I can enjoy my wealth and make merit?'"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Soṇa? When you were still a layman,
weren't you a good player of the arched harp?"

"Yes, sir."

"When your harp's strings were tuned too tight, was it resonant and
playable?"

"No, sir."

"When your harp's strings were tuned too slack, was it resonant and
playable?"

"No, sir."

"But when your harp's strings were tuned neither too tight nor too
slack, but fixed at an even tension, was it resonant and playable?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, Soṇa, when energy is too forceful it
leads to restlessness. When energy is too slack it leads to laziness.
So, Soṇa, you should focus on energy and serenity, find a
balance of the faculties, and learn the pattern of this situation."

"Yes, sir," Soṇa replied.

After advising Soṇa like this, the Buddha, as easily as a
strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from the Cool
Grove and reappeared on the Vulture's Peak.

After some time Soṇa focused on energy and serenity, found
a balance of the faculties, and learned the pattern of this situation.
Then Soṇa, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in
this very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal
for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Soṇa became one of the
perfected.

Then, when Soṇa had attained perfection, he thought, "Why
don't I go to the Buddha and declare my enlightenment in his presence?"
Then Soṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, a mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has
completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---is
dedicated to six things. They are dedicated to renunciation, seclusion,
kindness, the ending of craving, the ending of grasping, and mental
clarity.

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to renunciation solely out of mere faith.' But it
should not be seen like this. A mendicant with defilements ended does
not see in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs
improvement. They're dedicated to renunciation because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to seclusion because they enjoy possessions,
honor, and popularity.' But it should not be seen like this. ...

It may be, sir, that one of the venerables here thinks: 'Maybe this
venerable is dedicated to kindness because they believe that adhering to
precepts and observances is essential.' But it should not be seen like
this. ...

They're dedicated to the ending of craving because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

They're dedicated to the ending of grasping because they're free of
greed, hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

They're dedicated to clarity of mind because they're free of greed,
hate, and delusion with the end of greed, hate, and delusion.

When a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if compelling
sights come into the range of vision they don't overcome their mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance. Even if compelling sounds ... smells ... tastes ...
touches ... and ideas come into the range of the mind they don't
overcome the mind. The mind remains untainted. It is steady,
imperturbable, observing disappearance.

Suppose there was a mountain that was one solid mass of rock, without
cracks or holes. Even if violent storms were to blow up out of the east,
the west, the north, and the south, they couldn't make it shake or rock
or tremble.

In the same way, when a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this,
even if compelling sights come into the range of vision they don't
overcome their mind. ... The mind remains untainted. It is steady,
imperturbable, observing disappearance.

> When you're dedicated to renunciation\
> and seclusion of the heart;\
> when you're dedicated to kindness\
> and the end of grasping;
>
> when you're dedicated to the ending of craving\
> and clarity of heart;\
> and you've seen the arising of the senses,\
> your mind is rightly freed.
>
> For that one, rightly freed,\
> a mendicant with peaceful mind,\
> there's nothing to be improved,\
> and nothing more to do.
>
> As the wind cannot stir\
> a solid mass of rock,\
> so too sights, tastes, sounds,\
> smells, and touches---the lot---
>
> and ideas, whether liked or disliked,\
> don't disturb the unaffected one.\
> Their mind is steady and free\
> as they observe disappearance."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.56 With Phagguna  *Phaggunasutta*

Now at that time Venerable Phagguna was sick, suffering, gravely ill.
Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, Venerable Phagguna is sick. Sir, please go to Venerable Phagguna
out of sympathy." The Buddha consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
Venerable Phagguna. Venerable Phagguna saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance and tried to rise on his cot.

The Buddha said to him, "It's all right, Phagguna, don't get up. There
are some seats spread out by others, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said to Venerable Phagguna: "I hope
you're keeping well, Phagguna; I hope you're all right. And I hope the
pain is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its
growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading.

The winds piercing my head are so severe, it feels like a strong man
drilling into my head with a sharp point. I'm not keeping well.

The pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening
a tough leather strap around my head. I'm not keeping well.

The winds slicing my belly are so severe, like a deft butcher or their
apprentice were slicing open a cows's belly with a sharp meat cleaver.
I'm not keeping well.

The burning in my body is so severe, it feels like two strong men
grabbing a weaker man by the arms to burn and scorch him on a pit of
glowing coals. I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is
terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its
fading."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired Venerable
Phagguna with a Dhamma talk, after which he got up from his seat and
left.

Not long after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguna passed away. At the
time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear. Then Venerable
Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to
him, "Sir, soon after the Buddha left, Venerable Phagguna died. At the
time of his death, his faculties were bright and clear."

"And why shouldn't his faculties be bright and clear? The mendicant
Phagguna's mind was not freed from the five lower fetters. But when he
heard that teaching his mind was freed from them.

Ānanda, there are these six benefits to hearing the teaching at the
right time and examining the meaning at the right time. What six?

Firstly, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is not freed from the
five lower fetters. At the time of death they get to see the Realized
One. The Realized One proclaims a teaching to them that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. When they hear that teaching their mind is freed from the five
lower fetters. This is the first benefit of listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from
the five lower fetters. At the time of death they don't get to see the
Realized One, but they get to see a Realized One's disciple. The
Realized One's disciple teaches them Dhamma ... When they hear that
teaching their mind is freed from the five lower fetters. This is the
second benefit of listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is not freed from
the five lower fetters. At the time of death they don't get to see the
Realized One, or to see a Realized One's disciple. But they think about
and consider the teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as
they learned and memorized it. As they do so their mind is freed from
the five lower fetters. This is the third benefit of listening to the
teaching.

Next, take the case of a mendicant whose mind is freed from the five
lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At the
time of death they get to see the Realized One. The Realized One teaches
them Dhamma ... When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with
the supreme ending of attachments. This is the fourth benefit of
listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the
five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At
the time of death they don't get to see the Realized One, but they get
to see a Realized One's disciple. The Realized One's disciple teaches
them Dhamma ... When they hear that teaching their mind is freed with
the supreme ending of attachments. This is the fifth benefit of
listening to the teaching.

Next, take the case of another mendicant whose mind is freed from the
five lower fetters, but not with the supreme ending of attachments. At
the time of death they don't get to see the Realized One, or to see a
Realized One's disciple. But they think about and consider the teaching
in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized
it. As they do so their mind is freed with the supreme ending of
attachments. This is the sixth benefit of listening to the teaching.

These are the six benefits to hearing the teaching at the right time and
examining the meaning at the right time."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.57 The Six Classes of Rebirth  *Chaḷabhijātisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa describes six classes of rebirth:
black, blue, red, yellow, white, and ultimate white.

The black class of rebirth consists of slaughterers of sheep, pigs,
poultry, or deer, hunters or fishers, bandits, executioners, butchers of
cattle, jailers, and any others with a cruel livelihood.

The blue class of rebirth consists of mendicants whose life is thorny,
and any others who teach the efficacy of deeds and action.

The red class of rebirth consists of the Jain ascetics who wear one
cloth.

The yellow class of rebirth consists of the lay people dressed in white
who are disciples of the naked ascetics.

The white class of rebirth consists of male and female
Ājīvaka ascetics.

And the ultimate white class of rebirth consists of Nanda Vaccha, Kisa
Saṅkicca, and the bamboo-staffed ascetic
Gosāla.

These are the six classes of rebirth that Pūraṇa Kassapa
describes."

"But Ānanda, did the whole world authorize Pūraṇa Kassapa
to describe these six classes of rebirth?"

"No, sir."

"It's as if they were to force a chop on a poor, penniless person,
telling them, 'Eat this meat and pay for it!' In the same way,
Pūraṇa Kassapa has described these six classes of rebirth
without the consent of those ascetics and brahmins. And he has done so
in a foolish, incompetent, unskilled way, lacking common sense.

I, however, also describe six classes of rebirth. Listen and apply your
mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, Ānanda, are the six classes of rebirth? Someone born into a
dark class gives rise to a dark result. Someone born into a dark class
gives rise to a bright result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise
to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. Someone born into a
bright class gives rise to a dark result. Someone born into a bright
class gives rise to a bright result. Someone born into a bright class
gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a dark result?
It's when someone is reborn in a low family---a family of
corpse-workers, bamboo-workers, hunters, chariot-makers, or
scavengers---poor, with little to eat or drink, where life is tough, and
food and shelter are hard to find. And they're ugly, unsightly,
deformed, sickly---one-eyed, crippled, lame, or half-paralyzed. They
don't get to have food, drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands,
fragrance, and makeup; or bed, house, and lighting. And they do bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. That's how someone born into a dark class gives rise
to a dark result.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to a bright
result? It's when some person is reborn in a low family ... But they do
good things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm. That's
how someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright result.

And how does someone born into a dark class give rise to extinguishment,
which is neither dark nor bright? It's when some person is reborn in a
low family ... They shave off their hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. They give up the
five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken wisdom. They
firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
They truly develop the seven awakening factors. And then they give rise
to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright. That's how someone
born in a dark class gives rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark
nor bright.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a dark
result? It's when some person is reborn in an eminent family---a
well-to-do family of aristocrats, brahmins, or householders---rich,
affluent, and wealthy, with lots of gold and silver, lots of property
and assets, and lots of money and grain. And they're attractive,
good-looking, lovely, of surpassing beauty. They get to have food,
drink, clothes, and vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed,
house, and lighting. But they do bad things by way of body, speech, and
mind. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. That's how someone born into
a bright class gives rise to a dark result.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright
result? It's when some person is reborn in an eminent family ... And
they do good things by way of body, speech, and mind. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm. That's how someone born into a bright class give rise to a bright
result.

And how does someone born into a bright class give rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright? It's when some person
is reborn in an eminent family ... They shave off their hair and beard,
dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.
They give up the five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. They firmly establish their mind in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. They truly develop the seven awakening factors.
And then they give rise to extinguishment, which is neither dark nor
bright. That's how someone born into a bright class gives rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.

These are the six classes of rebirth."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.58 Defilements  *Āsavasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What six?

It's a mendicant who, by restraint, has given up the defilements that
should be given up by restraint. By using, they've given up the
defilements that should be given up by using. By enduring, they've given
up the defilements that should be given up by enduring. By avoiding,
they've given up the defilements that should be given up by avoiding. By
getting rid, they've given up the defilements that should be given up by
getting rid. By developing, they've given up the defilements that should
be given up by developing.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by restraint? Take
a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, lives restraining the eye
faculty. For the distressing and feverish defilements that might arise
in someone who lives without restraint of the eye faculty do not arise
when there is such restraint. Reflecting rationally, they live
restraining the ear faculty ... the nose faculty ... the tongue faculty
... the body faculty ... the mind faculty. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
restraint of the mind faculty do not arise when there is such restraint.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by restraint.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by using? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, makes use of robes: 'Only for the
sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; and for covering up the private
parts.' Reflecting rationally, they make use of almsfood: 'Not for fun,
indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to
avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put
an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will
have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.'
Reflecting rationally, they make use of lodgings: 'Only for the sake of
warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies,
mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and
to enjoy retreat.' Reflecting rationally, they make use of medicines and
supplies for the sick: 'Only for the sake of warding off the pains of
illness and to promote good health.' For the distressing and feverish
defilements that might arise in someone who lives without using these
things do not arise when they are used. These are called the defilements
that should be given up by using.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by enduring? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, endures cold, heat, hunger, and
thirst. They endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and
reptiles. They endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And they put up with
physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening. For the distressing and feverish defilements that
might arise in someone who lives without enduring these things do not
arise when they are endured. These are called the defilements that
should be given up by enduring.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by avoiding? Take a
mendicant who, reflecting rationally, avoids a wild elephant, a wild
horse, a wild ox, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, thorny ground, a pit, a
cliff, a swamp, and a sewer. Reflecting rationally, they avoid sitting
on inappropriate seats, walking in inappropriate neighborhoods, and
mixing with bad friends---whatever sensible spiritual companions would
believe to be a bad setting. For the distressing and feverish
defilements that might arise in someone who lives without avoiding these
things do not arise when they are avoided. These are called the
defilements that should be given up by avoiding.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by getting rid?
Take a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, doesn't tolerate a sensual,
malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They don't tolerate any
bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them up, get rid of
them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
getting rid of these things do not arise when they are gotten rid of.
These are called the defilements that should be given up by getting rid.

And what are the defilements that should be given up by developing? Take
a mendicant who, reflecting rationally, develops the awakening factors
of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture,
tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. For the distressing and
feverish defilements that might arise in someone who lives without
developing these things do not arise when they are developed. These are
called the defilements that should be given up by developing.

A mendicant with these six qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.59 With Dārukammika  *Dārukammikasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying at
Ñātika in the brick house.

Then the householder Dārukammika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Householder, I
wonder whether your family gives gifts?"

"It does, sir. Gifts are given to those mendicants who are perfected or
on the path to perfection; they live in the wilderness, eat only
almsfood, and wear rag robes."

"Householder, as a layman enjoying sensual pleasures, living at home
with your children, using sandalwood imported from Kāsi,
wearing garlands, fragrance, and makeup, and accepting gold and
currency, it's hard for you to know who is perfected or on the path to
perfection.

If a mendicant living in the wilderness is restless, insolent, fickle,
scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking situational awareness and
immersion, with straying mind and undisciplined faculties, then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant living in the wilderness
is not restless, insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but has
established mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with
unified mind and restrained faculties, then in this respect they're
praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who lives within a village is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who lives within a village
is not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who eats only almsfood is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who eats only almsfood is
not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who accepts invitations is restless ... then in this
respect they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who accepts invitations is
not restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who wears rag robes is restless ... then in this respect
they're reprehensible. If a mendicant who wears rag robes is not
restless ... then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

If a mendicant who wears robes offered by householders is restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, loose-tongued, unmindful, lacking
situational awareness and immersion, with straying mind and
undisciplined faculties, then in this respect they're reprehensible. If
a mendicant who wears robes offered by householders is not restless,
insolent, fickle, scurrilous, or loose-tongued, but has established
mindfulness, situational awareness and immersion, with unified mind and
restrained faculties, then in this respect they're praiseworthy.

Go ahead, householder, give gifts to the Saṅgha. Your mind
will become bright and clear, and when your body breaks up, after death,
you'll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

"Sir, from this day forth I will give gifts to the Saṅgha."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.60 With Hatthisāriputta  *Hatthisāriputtasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

Now at that time several senior mendicants, after the meal, on their
return from almsround, sat together in the pavilion talking about the
teachings. Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta interrupted them
while they were talking.

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita said to Venerable Citta
Hatthisāriputta, "Venerable, please don't interrupt the
senior mendicants while they're talking about the teachings. Wait until
the end of the discussion."

When he said this, Citta Hatthisāriputta's companions said
to Mahākoṭṭhita, "Venerable, please don't rebuke Citta
Hatthisāriputta. He is astute, and quite capable of talking
about the teachings with the senior mendicants."

"It's not easy to know this, reverends, for those who don't comprehend
another's mind.

Take a person who is the sweetest of the sweet, the most even-tempered
of the even-tempered, the calmest of the calm, so long as they live
relying on the Teacher or a spiritual companion in a teacher's role. But
when they're separated from the Teacher or a spiritual companion in a
teacher's role, they mix closely with monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen;
with rulers and their chief ministers, and with monastics of other
religions and their disciples. As they mix closely, they become intimate
and loose, spending time chatting, and so lust infects their mind. They
resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose an ox fond of crops was tied up or shut in a pen. Would it be
right to say that that ox will never again invade the crops?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that that ox will
snap the ropes or break out of the pen, and then invade the crops."

"In the same way, take a person who is the sweetest of the sweet ... As
they mix closely, they become intimate and loose, spending time
chatting, and so lust infects their mind. They resign the training and
return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, quite secluded from sensual pleasures ... enters
and remains in the first absorption. Thinking, 'I get the first
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

Suppose the heavens were raining heavily at the crossroads so that the
dust vanished and mud appeared. Would it be right to say that now dust
will never appear at this crossroad again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that people or
cattle and so on will cross over the crossroad, or that the wind and sun
will evaporate the moisture so that the dust appears again."

"In the same way, take a person who, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures ... enters and remains in the first absorption. Thinking, 'I
get the first absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign
the training and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, as the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second absorption.
Thinking, 'I get the second absorption!' they mix closely with monks ...
They resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose there was a large pond not far from a town or village. After the
heavens have rained heavily there, the clams and mussels, and pebbles
and gravel would vanish. Would it be right to say that now the clams and
mussels, and pebbles and gravel will never appear here again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that people or
cattle and so on will drink from the pond, or that the wind and sun will
evaporate it so that the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel
appear again."

"In the same way, take a person who, as the placing of the mind and
keeping it connected are stilled ... enters and remains in the second
absorption. Thinking, 'I get the second absorption!' they mix closely
with monks ... They resign the training and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, with the fading away of rapture ... enters and
remains in the third absorption. Thinking, 'I get the third absorption!'
they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training and return to a
lesser life.

Suppose a person had finished a delicious meal. They'd have no appetite
for leftovers. Would it be right to say that now food will never appeal
to this person again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it's quite possible that other food
won't appeal to that person as long as the nourishment is still present.
But when the nourishment vanishes food will appeal again."

"In the same way, take a person who, with the fading away of rapture ...
enters and remains in the third absorption. Thinking, 'I get the third
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain ... enters and
remains in the fourth absorption. Thinking, 'I get the fourth
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake, unruffled and free of
waves. Would it be right to say that now waves will never appear in this
lake again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that a violent
storm could blow up out of the east, west, north, or south, and stir up
waves in that lake."

"In the same way, take a person who, giving up pleasure and pain ...
enters and remains in the fourth absorption. Thinking, 'I get the fourth
absorption!' they mix closely with monks ... They resign the training
and return to a lesser life.

And take a person who, not focusing on any signs, enters and remains in
the signless immersion of the heart. Thinking, 'I get the signless
immersion of the heart!' they mix closely with monks, nuns, laymen, and
laywomen; with rulers and their chief ministers, and with monastics of
other religions and their disciples. As they mix closely, they become
intimate and loose, spending time chatting, and so lust infects their
mind. They resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose a ruler or their chief minister, while walking along the road
with an army of four divisions, was to arrive at a forest grove where
they set up camp for the night. There, because of the noise of the
elephants, horses, chariots, soldiers, and the drums, kettledrums,
horns, and cymbals, the chirping of crickets would vanish. Would it be
right to say that now the chirping of crickets will never be heard in
this woodland grove again?"

"No it would not, reverend. For it is quite possible that the ruler or
their chief minister will depart from that woodland grove so that the
chirping of crickets will be heard there again."

"In the same way, take a person who, not focusing on any signs, enters
and remains in the signless immersion of the heart ... They resign the
training and return to a lesser life."

Then after some time Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta
resigned the training and returned to a lesser life. Then the mendicants
who were his companions went up to Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita
and said, "Did Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita comprehend Citta
Hatthisāriputta's mind and know that he had gained such and
such meditative attainments, yet he would still resign the training and
return to a lesser life? Or did deities tell you about it?"

"Reverends, I comprehended his mind and knew this. And deities also told
me."

Then the mendicants who were Citta Hatthisāriputta's
companions went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said
to him, "Sir, Citta Hatthisāriputta, who had gained such
and such meditative attainments, has still resigned the training and
returned to a lesser life."

"Mendicants, soon Citta will remember renunciation."

And not long after Citta Hatthisāriputta shaved off his
hair and beard, dressed in ocher robes, and went forth from the lay life
to homelessness. Then Citta Hatthisāriputta, living alone,
withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon realized the supreme
culmination of the spiritual path in this very life. He lived having
achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Citta Hatthisāriputta became
one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 6.61 In the Middle  *Majjhesutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Varanasi, in the deer park at Isipatana.

Now at that time, after the meal, on return from almsround, several
senior mendicants sat together in the pavilion and this discussion came
up among them, "Reverends, this was said by the Buddha in 'The Way to
the Far Shore', in 'The Questions of Metteyya':

> 'The thoughtful one who has known both ends,\
> and is not stuck in the middle:\
> he is a great man, I declare,\
> he has escaped the seamstress here.'

But what is one end? What's the second end? What's the middle? And who
is the seamstress?" When this was said, one of the mendicants said to
the senior mendicants:

"Contact, reverends, is one end. The origin of contact is the second
end. The cessation of contact is the middle. And craving is the
seamstress, for craving weaves one to being reborn in one state of
existence or another. That's how a mendicant directly knows what should
be directly known and completely understands what should be completely
understood. Knowing and understanding thus they make an end of suffering
in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"The past, reverends, is one end. The future is the second end. The
present is the middle. And craving is the seamstress ... That's how a
mendicant directly knows ... an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Pleasant feeling, reverends, is one end. Painful feeling is the second
end. Neutral feeling is the middle. And craving is the seamstress ...
That's how a mendicant directly knows ... an end of suffering in this
very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Name, reverends, is one end. Form is the second end. Consciousness is
the middle. And craving is the seamstress ... That's how a mendicant
directly knows ... an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"The six interior sense fields, reverends, are one end. The six exterior
sense fields are the second end. Consciousness is the middle. And
craving is the seamstress ... That's how a mendicant directly knows ...
an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Substantial reality, reverends, is one end. The origin of substantial
reality is the second end. The cessation of substantial reality is the
middle. And craving is the seamstress, for craving weaves one to being
reborn in one state of existence or another. That's how a mendicant
directly knows what should be directly known and completely understands
what should be completely understood. Knowing and understanding thus
they make an end of suffering in this very life."

When this was said, one of the mendicants said to the senior mendicants:

"Each of us has spoken from the heart. Come, reverends, let's go to the
Buddha, and inform him about this. As he answers, so we'll remember it."

"Yes, reverend," those senior mendicants replied. Then those senior
mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
informed the Buddha of all they had discussed. They asked, "Sir, who has
spoken well?"

"Mendicants, you've all spoken well in a way. However, this is what I
was referring to in 'The Way to the Far Shore', in 'The Questions of
Metteyya' when I said:

> 'The sage has known both ends,\
> and is not stuck in the middle.\
> He is a great man, I declare,\
> he has escaped the seamstress here.'

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Contact, mendicants, is one end. The origin of contact is the second
end. The cessation of contact is the middle. And craving is the
seamstress, for craving weaves one to being reborn in one state of
existence or another. That's how a mendicant directly knows what should
be directly known and completely understands what should be completely
understood. Knowing and understanding thus they make an end of suffering
in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.62 Knowledge of the Faculties of Persons  *Purisindriyañāṇasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a town of the Kosalans named
Daṇḍakappaka. The Buddha left the road and sat at the root
of a tree on the seat spread out. The mendicants entered
Daṇḍakappaka to look for a guest house.

Then Venerable Ānanda together with several mendicants went to the
Aciravatī River to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged
from the water he stood in one robe drying his limbs.

Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable Ānanda, and said to him,
"Reverend Ānanda, when the Buddha declared that Devadatta was going to a
place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable, did he
do so after wholeheartedly deliberating, or was this just a way of
speaking?"

"You're right, reverend, that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

"Ānanda, that mendicant must be junior, recently gone forth, or else a
foolish, incompetent senior mendicant. How on earth can he take
something that I have declared categorically to be ambiguous? I do not
see a single other person about whom I have given such whole-hearted
deliberation before making a declaration as I did in the case of
Devadatta.

As long as I saw even a fraction of a hair's tip of goodness in
Devadatta I did not declare that he was going to a place of loss, to
hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable. But when I saw that
there was not even a fraction of a hair's tip of goodness in Devadatta I
declared that he was going to a place of loss, to hell, there to remain
for an eon, irredeemable.

Suppose there was a sewer deeper than a man's height, full to the brim
with feces, and someone was sunk into it over their head. Then along
comes a person who wants to help make them safe, who wants to lift them
out of that sewer. But circling all around the sewer they couldn't see
even a fraction of a hair's tip of that person that was not smeared with
feces.

In the same way, when I saw that there was not even a fraction of a
hair's tip of goodness in Devadatta I declared that he was going to a
place of loss, to hell, there to remain for an eon, irredeemable. If you
would all listen, Ānanda, I will analyze the Realized One's knowledges
of the faculties of persons."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
analyze the faculties of persons. The mendicants will listen and
remember it."

"Well then, Ānanda, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Ānanda replied. The Buddha said this:

"Ānanda, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand:
'Both skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After
some time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The skillful
qualities of this person have vanished, but the unskillful qualities are
still present. Nevertheless, their skillful root is unbroken, and from
that the skillful will appear. So this person is not liable to decline
in the future.' Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not
weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. They're sown in a
well-prepared, productive field. Wouldn't you know that those seeds
would grow, increase, and mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is not liable to decline in the future ...
This is how another individual is known to the Realized One by
comprehending their mind. And this is how the Realized One knows a
person's faculties by comprehending their mind. And this is how the
Realized One knows the future origination of a person's qualities by
comprehending their mind.

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The unskillful qualities
of this person have vanished, but the skillful qualities are still
present. Nevertheless, their unskillful root is unbroken, and from that
the unskillful will appear. So this person is still liable to decline in
the future.' Suppose some seeds were intact, unspoiled, not
weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And they were sown on a broad
rock. Wouldn't you know that those seeds would not grow, increase, and
mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is still liable to decline in the future ...
This is how another individual is known to the Realized One ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'This person has not even a
fraction of a hair's tip of goodness. They have exclusively dark,
unskillful qualities. When their body breaks up, after death, they will
be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.'
Suppose some seeds were broken, spoiled, weather-damaged. They're sown
in a well-prepared, productive field. Wouldn't you know that those seeds
would not grow, increase, and mature?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... 'This person has not even a fraction of a hair's tip of
goodness. They have exclusively dark, unskillful qualities. When their
body breaks up, after death, they will be reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell.' ..."

When he said this, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "Sir, can you
describe three other persons who are counterparts of these three?"

"I can, Ānanda," said the Buddha. "Ānanda, when I've comprehended the
mind of a person, I understand: 'Both skillful and unskillful qualities
are found in this person.' After some time I comprehend their mind and
understand: 'The skillful qualities of this person have vanished, but
the unskillful qualities are still present. Nevertheless, their skillful
root is unbroken, but it's about to be totally destroyed. So this person
is still liable to decline in the future.' Suppose that there were some
burning coals, blazing and glowing. And they were placed on a broad
rock. Wouldn't you know that those coals would not grow, increase, and
spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose it was the late afternoon and the sun was going down.
Wouldn't you know that the light was about to vanish and darkness
appear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose that it's nearly time for the midnight meal. Wouldn't you
know that the light had vanished and the darkness appeared?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is still liable to decline in the future ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'The unskillful qualities
of this person have vanished, but the skillful qualities are still
present. Nevertheless, their unskillful root is unbroken, but it's about
to be totally destroyed. So this person is not liable to decline in the
future.' Suppose that there were some burning coals, blazing and
glowing. They were placed on a pile of grass or timber. Wouldn't you
know that those coals would grow, increase, and spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"Suppose it's the crack of dawn and the sun is rising. Wouldn't you know
that the dark will vanish and the light appear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Or suppose that it's nearly time for the midday meal. Wouldn't you know
that the dark had vanished and the light appeared?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... This person is not liable to decline in the future ...

When I've comprehended the mind of a person, I understand: 'Both
skillful and unskillful qualities are found in this person.' After some
time I comprehend their mind and understand: 'This person has not even a
fraction of a hair's tip of unskillful qualities. They have exclusively
bright, blameless qualities. They will become extinguished in this very
life.' Suppose that there were some cool, quenched coals. They were
placed on a pile of grass or timber. Wouldn't you know that those coals
would not grow, increase, and spread?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when I've comprehended the mind of a person, I
understand ... 'This person has not even a fraction of a hair's tip of
unskillful qualities. They have exclusively bright, blameless qualities.
They will become extinguished in this very life.' This is how another
individual is known to the Realized One by comprehending their mind. And
this is how the Realized One knows a person's faculties by comprehending
their mind. And this is how the Realized One knows the future
origination of a person's qualities by comprehending their mind.

And so, Ānanda, of the first three people one is not liable to decline,
one is liable to decline, and one is bound for a place of loss, hell.
And of the second three people, one is liable to decline, one is not
liable to decline, and one is bound to become extinguished."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.63 Penetrative  *Nibbedhikasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a penetrative exposition of the teaching.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, what is the penetrative exposition of the teaching? Sensual
pleasures should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.

Deeds should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to their cessation should be known.

Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to its cessation should be known.

'Sensual pleasures should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these five
kinds of sensual stimulation. Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. However, these are not
sensual pleasures. In the training of the Noble One they're called
'kinds of sensual stimulation'.

> Greedy intention is a person's sensual pleasure.\
> The world's pretty things aren't sensual pleasures.\
> Greedy intention is a person's sensual pleasure.\
> The world's pretty things stay just as they are,\
> but the attentive remove desire for them.

And what is the source of sensual pleasures? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of sensual pleasures? The sensual desire for
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touches are all different. This is
called the diversity of sensual pleasures.

And what is the result of sensual pleasures? When one who desires
sensual pleasures creates a corresponding incarnation, partaking of
either good or bad deeds---this is called the result of sensual
pleasures.

And what is the cessation of sensual pleasures? When contact ceases,
sensual pleasures cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of
sensual pleasures is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands sensual pleasures in this way---and
understands their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the practice
that leads to their cessation---they understand that this penetrative
spiritual life is the cessation of sensual pleasures. 'Sensual pleasures
should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the
practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these three
feelings: pleasant, painful, and neutral.

And what is the source of feelings? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of feelings? There are pleasant feelings of
the flesh, pleasant feelings not of the flesh, painful feelings of the
flesh, painful feelings not of the flesh, neutral feelings of the flesh,
and neutral feelings not of the flesh. This is called the diversity of
feelings.

And what is the result of feelings? When one who feels creates a
corresponding incarnation, partaking of either good or bad deeds---this
is called the result of feelings.

And what is the cessation of feelings? When contact ceases, feelings
cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply
this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands feelings in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
feelings. 'Feelings should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these six
perceptions: perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and
ideas.

And what is the source of perceptions? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of perceptions? The perceptions of sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are all different. This is
called the diversity of perceptions.

And what is the result of perceptions? Communication is the result of
perception, I say. You communicate something in whatever manner you
perceive it, saying 'That's what I perceived.' This is called the result
of perceptions.

And what is the cessation of perception? When contact ceases, perception
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of perceptions is
simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands perception in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
perception. 'Perceptions should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? There are these three
defilements: the defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance.

And what is the source of defilements? Ignorance is the source of
defilements.

And what is the diversity of defilements? There are defilements that
lead to rebirth in hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, the human
world, and the world of the gods. This is called the diversity of
defilements.

And what is the result of defilements? When one who is ignorant creates
a corresponding incarnation, partaking of either good or bad
deeds---this is called the result of defilements.

And what is the cessation of defilements? When ignorance ceases,
defilements cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of
defilements is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands defilements in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
defilements. 'Defilements should be known. And their source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

'Deeds should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation,
and the practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's
what I said, but why did I say it? It is intention that I call deeds.
For after making a choice one acts by way of body, speech, and mind.

And what is the source of deeds? Contact is their source.

And what is the diversity of deeds? There are deeds that lead to rebirth
in hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, the human world, and the
world of the gods. This is called the diversity of deeds.

And what is the result of deeds? The result of deeds is threefold, I
say: in this very life, on rebirth in the next life, or at some later
time. This is called the result of deeds.

And what is the cessation of deeds? When contact ceases, deeds cease.
The practice that leads to the cessation of deeds is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

When a noble disciple understands deeds in this way ... they understand
that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of deeds. 'Deeds
should be known. And their source, diversity, result, cessation, and the
practice that leads to their cessation should be known.' That's what I
said, and this is why I said it.

'Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity, result,
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation should be
known.' That's what I said, but why did I say it? Rebirth is suffering;
old age is suffering; illness is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; not getting what
you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering.

And what is the source of suffering? Craving is the source of suffering.

And what is the diversity of suffering? There is suffering that is
severe, mild, slow to fade, and quick to fade. This is called the
diversity of suffering.

And what is the result of suffering? It's when someone who is overcome
and overwhelmed by suffering sorrows and wails and laments, beating
their breast and falling into confusion. Or else, overcome by that
suffering, they begin an external search, wondering: 'Who knows one or
two phrases to stop this suffering?' The result of suffering is either
confusion or a search, I say. This is called the result of suffering.

And what is the cessation of suffering? When craving ceases, suffering
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of suffering is simply
this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion.

When a noble disciple understands suffering in this way ... they
understand that this penetrative spiritual life is the cessation of
suffering. 'Suffering should be known. And its source, diversity,
result, cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation should
be known.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it.

This is the penetrative exposition of the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.64 The Lion's Roar  *Sīhanādasutta*

"Mendicants, the Realized One possesses six powers of a Realized One.
With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. What six?

Firstly, the Realized One truly understands the possible as possible and
the impossible as impossible. Since he truly understands this, this is a
power of the Realized One. Relying on this he claims the bull's place,
roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so he
recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And he lives having
realized it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since
he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. Relying
on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel. These are the six powers of a
Realized One that the Realized One possesses. With these he claims the
bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and turns the
divine wheel.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible,
the Realized One answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the result of deeds undertaken in the past, future, and
present in terms of grounds and causes, the Realized One answers them in
whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the
absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments, the Realized One
answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of recollection of past lives, the Realized One answers them
in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of passing away and rebirth of sentient beings, the Realized
One answers them in whatever manner he has truly known it.

If others come to the Realized One and ask questions about his true
knowledge of the ending of defilements, the Realized One answers them in
whatever manner he has truly known it.

And I say that true knowledge of the possible as possible and the
impossible as impossible is for those with immersion, not for those
without immersion. And true knowledge of the result of deeds undertaken
in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and causes is for
those with immersion, not for those without immersion. And true
knowledge of corruption, cleansing, and emergence regarding the
absorptions, liberations, immersions, and attainments is for those with
immersion, not for those without immersion. And true knowledge of the
recollection of past lives is for those with immersion, not for those
without immersion. And true knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of
sentient beings is for those with immersion, not for those without
immersion. And true knowledge of the ending of defilements is for those
with immersion, not for those without immersion.

And so, mendicants, immersion is the path. No immersion is the wrong
path."

## The Chapter on Deities

### N 6.65 The Fruit of Non-Return  *Anāgāmiphalasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize the fruit of
non-return. What six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness,
unmindfulness, and witlessness. Without giving up these six things you
can't realize the fruit of non-return.

After giving up six things you can realize the fruit of non-return. What
six? Lack of faith, conscience, and prudence; laziness, unmindfulness,
and witlessness. After giving up these six things you can realize the
fruit of non-return."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.66 Perfection  *Arahattasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith,
and negligence. Without giving up these six things you can't realize
perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Dullness, drowsiness, restlessness, remorse, lack of faith, and
negligence. After giving up these six things you can realize
perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.67 Friends  *Mittasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant with bad friends,
companions, and associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and
attending, and following their example, will fulfill the practice
dealing with the supplementary regulations. Without fulfilling the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's impossible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling the practice of a
trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without fulfilling ethics,
it's impossible to give up sensual desire, or desire to be reborn in the
realm of luminous form or in the formless realm.

It's quite possible that a mendicant with good friends, companions, and
associates, while frequenting, accompanying, and attending, and
following their example, will fulfill the practice dealing with the
supplementary regulations. Having fulfilled the practice dealing with
supplementary regulations, it's possible to fulfill the practice of a
trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a trainee, it's possible to
fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's possible to give up
sensual desire, and desire to be reborn in the realm of luminous form
and in the formless realm."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.68 Enjoying Company  *Saṅgaṇikārāmasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant who enjoys company
and groups, who loves them and likes to enjoy them, should take pleasure
in being alone in seclusion. Without taking pleasure in being alone in
seclusion, it's impossible to learn the patterns of the mind. Without
learning the patterns of the mind, it's impossible to fulfill right
view. Without fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right
immersion. Without fulfilling right immersion, it's impossible to give
up the fetters. Without giving up the fetters, it's impossible to
realize extinguishment.

It's quite possible that a mendicant who doesn't enjoy company and
groups, who doesn't love them and like to enjoy them, should take
pleasure in being alone in seclusion. For someone who takes pleasure in
being alone in seclusion, it's possible to learn the patterns of the
mind. For someone who learns the patterns of the mind, it's possible to
fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's possible to
fulfill right immersion. Having fulfilled right immersion, it's possible
to give up the fetters. Having given up the fetters, it's possible to
realize extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.69 A God  *Devatāsutta*

Then, late at night, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's
Grove, went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, these six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What
six? Respect for the Teacher, for the teaching, for the
Saṅgha, for the training; being easy to admonish, and good
friendship. These six things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant."

That's what that deity said, and the teacher approved. Then that deity,
knowing that the teacher approved, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Tonight, a glorious deity, lighting up the entire Jeta's Grove, came to
me, bowed, stood to one side, and said to me: 'Sir, these six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant. What six? Respect for the
Teacher, for the teaching, for the Saṅgha, for the
training; being easy to admonish, and good friendship. These six things
don't lead to the decline of a mendicant.'

That is what that deity said. Then he bowed and respectfully circled me,
keeping me on his right side, before vanishing right there."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher
and praises such respect. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
such respect to respect the Teacher. And they praise other mendicants
who respect the Teacher at the right time, truthfully and correctly.
They personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the
Saṅgha ... They personally respect the training ... They
are personally easy to admonish ... They personally have good friends,
and praise such friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
good friends to develop good friendship. And they praise other
mendicants who have good friends at the right time, truthfully and
correctly. That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the
detailed meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It's when a mendicant personally respects the Teacher ... They
personally respect the teaching ... They personally respect the
Saṅgha ... They personally respect the training ... They
are personally easy to admonish ... They personally have good friends,
and praise such friendship. And they encourage other mendicants who lack
good friends to develop good friendship. And they praise other
mendicants who have good friends at the right time, truthfully and
correctly. This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said
in brief."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.70 Immersion  *Samādhisutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible that a mendicant without immersion
that is peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many
kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and becoming one again;
appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a
rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the
earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying
cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the
hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They control the body as
far as the realm of divinity.

It's impossible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or
far.

It's impossible that they'll understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with their own mind, understanding
mind with greed as 'mind with greed' ... and freed mind as 'freed mind'.

It's impossible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's impossible that with clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses
the human, they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according
to their deeds.

It's impossible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements.

But it's quite possible that a mendicant who has immersion that is
peaceful, refined, tranquil, and unified will wield the many kinds of
psychic power ...

It's possible that with clairaudience that is purified and superhuman,
they'll hear both kinds of sounds ...

It's possible that they'll understand the minds of other beings ...

It's possible that they'll recollect many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

It's possible that with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman,
they'll understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their
deeds.

It's possible that they'll realize the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.71 Capable of Realizing  *Sakkhibhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities is incapable of realizing
anything that can be realized, since each and every one is within range.
What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't truly understand which qualities
make things worse, which keep things steady, which lead to distinction,
and which lead to penetration. And they don't practice carefully or do
what's suitable. A mendicant with these six qualities is incapable of
realizing anything that can be realized, since each and every one is
within range.

A mendicant with six qualities is capable of realizing anything that can
be realized, since each and every one is within range. What six? It's
when a mendicant truly understands which qualities make things worse,
which keep things steady, which lead to distinction, and which lead to
penetration. And they practice carefully and do what's suitable. A
mendicant with these six qualities is capable of realizing anything that
can be realized, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.72 Strength  *Balasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities can't attain strength in
immersion. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in entering
immersion, skilled in remaining in immersion, or skilled in emerging
from immersion. And they don't practice carefully and persistently, and
they don't do what's suitable. A mendicant who has these six qualities
can't attain strength in immersion.

A mendicant who has six qualities can attain strength in immersion. What
six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in entering immersion, skilled in
remaining in immersion, and skilled in emerging from immersion. And they
practice carefully and persistently, and do what's suitable. A mendicant
who has these six qualities can attain strength in immersion."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.73 First Absorption (1st)  *Paṭhamatajjhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures,
ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt.
And the drawbacks of sensual pleasures have not been truly seen clearly
with right wisdom. Without giving up these six qualities you can't enter
and remain in the first absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Desire for sensual pleasures, ill will,
dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. And the
drawbacks of sensual pleasures have been truly seen clearly with right
wisdom. After giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in
the first absorption."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.74 First Absorption (2nd)  *Dutiyatajjhānasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't enter and
remain in the first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't enter and remain in the first
absorption.

But after giving up these six qualities you can enter and remain in the
first absorption. What six? Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and
sensual, malicious, and cruel perceptions. After giving up these six
qualities you can enter and remain in the first absorption."

## The Chapter on Perfection

### N 6.75 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six qualities they live unhappily in
this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and when the body
breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth. What six?
Sensual, malicious, and cruel thoughts; and sensual, malicious, and
cruel perceptions. When a mendicant has these six qualities they live
unhappily in this very life---with distress, anguish, and fever---and
when the body breaks up, after death, they can expect a bad rebirth.

When a mendicant has six qualities they live happily in this very
life---without distress, anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks
up, after death, they can expect a good rebirth. What six? Thoughts of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. And perceptions of
renunciation, good will, and harmlessness. When a mendicant has these
six qualities they live happily in this very life---without distress,
anguish, or fever---and when the body breaks up, after death, they can
expect a good rebirth."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.76 Perfection  *Arahattasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't realize perfection.
What six? Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex,
overestimation, obstinacy, and groveling. Without giving up these six
qualities you can't realize perfection.

After giving up six things you can realize perfection. What six?
Conceit, inferiority complex, superiority complex, overestimation,
obstinacy, and groveling. After giving up these six things you can
realize perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.77 Superhuman States  *Uttarimanussadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six qualities you can't realize a
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
What six? Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding
the sense doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. Without giving
up these six qualities you can't realize a superhuman distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

But after giving up six qualities you can realize a superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. What six?
Lack of mindfulness and situational awareness, not guarding the sense
doors, eating too much, deceit, and flattery. After giving up these six
qualities you can realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.78 Joy and Happiness  *Sukhasomanassasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has six things they're full of joy and
happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements. What six? It's when a mendicant enjoys the
teaching, meditation, giving up, seclusion, kindness, and
non-proliferation. When a mendicant has these six things they're full of
joy and happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork
for ending the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.79 Achievement  *Adhigamasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant who has six qualities is unable to acquire more
skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is not skilled in progress,
skilled in regress, or skilled in means. They don't generate enthusiasm
to achieve skillful qualities not yet achieved. They don't protect
skillful qualities they have achieved. And they don't try to persevere
in the task. A mendicant who has these six qualities is unable to
acquire more skillful qualities or to increase the skillful qualities
they've already acquired.

A mendicant who has six qualities is able to acquire more skillful
qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired. What six? It's when a mendicant is skilled in progress,
skilled in regress, and skilled in means. They generate enthusiasm to
achieve skillful qualities not yet achieved. They protect skillful
qualities they have achieved. And they try to persevere in the task. A
mendicant who has these six qualities is able to acquire more skillful
qualities or to increase the skillful qualities they've already
acquired."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.80 Greatness  *Mahantattasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities soon acquires great and
abundant good qualities. What six? It's when a mendicant is full of
light, full of practice, full of inspiration, and full of eagerness.
They don't slack off when it comes to developing skillful qualities.
They reach further. A mendicant who has these six qualities soon
acquires great and abundant good qualities."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.81 Hell (1st)  *Paṭhamanirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they have corrupt wishes and wrong view. Someone with these six
qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And they
have few desires and right view. Someone with these six qualities is
raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.82 Hell (2nd)  *Dutiyanirayasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is cast down to hell. What six?
They kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie.
And they're greedy and rude. Someone with these six qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with six qualities is raised up to heaven. What six? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. And
they're not greedy or rude. Someone with these six qualities is raised
up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.83 The Best Thing  *Aggadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize the best
thing, perfection. What six? It's when a mendicant is faithless,
shameless, imprudent, lazy, and witless. And they're concerned with
their body and their life. A mendicant with these six qualities can't
realize the best thing, perfection.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize the best thing, perfection.
What six? It's when a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
energetic, and wise. And they have no concern for their body and their
life. A mendicant with these six qualities can realize the best thing,
perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.84 Day and Night  *Rattidivasasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six?
It's when a mendicant has many desires---they're frustrated and not
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And they're faithless, unethical, unmindful, and
witless. A mendicant with these six qualities can expect decline, not
growth, in skillful qualities, whether by day or by night.

A mendicant with six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night. What six? It's when a
mendicant doesn't have many desires---they're not frustrated but content
with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies
for the sick. And they're faithful, ethical, mindful, and wise. A
mendicant with these six qualities can expect growth, not decline, in
skillful qualities, whether by day or by night."

## The Chapter on Coolness

### N 6.85 Coolness  *Sītibhāvasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with six qualities can't realize supreme
coolness. What six? It's when a mendicant doesn't keep their mind in
check when they should. They don't exert their mind when they should.
They don't encourage the mind when they should. They don't watch over
the mind with equanimity when they should. They have bad convictions.
They delight in substantial reality. A mendicant with these six
qualities can't realize supreme coolness.

A mendicant with six qualities can realize supreme coolness. What six?
It's when a mendicant keeps their mind in check when they should. They
exert their mind when they should. They encourage the mind when they
should. They watch over the mind with equanimity when they should. They
have excellent convictions. They delight in extinguishment. A mendicant
with these six qualities can realize supreme coolness."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.86 Obstacles  *Āvaraṇasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They're obstructed by deeds, defilements, or
results. And they're faithless, unenthusiastic, and witless. Someone
with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They're not obstructed by deeds, defilements, or results. And they're
faithful, enthusiastic, and wise. Someone with these six qualities is
able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful qualities when
listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.87 A Murderer  *Voropitasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? They murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They cause a
schism in the Saṅgha. They're witless, dull, and idiotic.
Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure path with
regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
They don't murder their mother or father or a perfected one. They don't
maliciously shed the blood of a Realized One. They don't cause a schism
in the Saṅgha. They're wise, bright, and clever. Someone
with these six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to
skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.88 Wanting to Listen  *Sussūsatisutta*

"Mendicants, someone with six qualities is unable to enter the sure path
with regards to skillful qualities even when listening to the true
teaching. What six? When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the
Realized One is being taught they don't want to listen. They don't
actively listen or try to understand. They learn the incorrect meaning
and reject the correct meaning. They accept views that contradict the
teaching. Someone with these six qualities is unable to enter the sure
path with regards to skillful qualities, even when listening to the true
teaching.

Someone with six qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards
to skillful qualities when listening to the true teaching. What six?
When the teaching and practice proclaimed by the Realized One is being
taught they want to listen. They actively listen and try to understand.
They learn the correct meaning and reject the incorrect meaning. They
accept views that conform with the teaching. Someone with these six
qualities is able to enter the sure path with regards to skillful
qualities when listening to the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.89 Not Giving Up  *Appahāyasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't become accomplished
in view. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. Without giving up these six things
you can't become accomplished in view.

After giving up six things you can become accomplished in view. What
six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of precepts and
observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that lead to rebirth
in places of loss. After giving up these six things you can become
accomplished in view."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.90 Given Up  *Pahīnasutta*

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view has given up these six
things. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. A person accomplished in view has
given up these six things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.91 Can't Give Rise  *Abhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, a person accomplished in view can't give rise to six
things. What six? Substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, and forms of greed, hate, and delusion that
lead to rebirth in places of loss. A person accomplished in view can't
give rise to these six things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.92 Things That Can't Be Done (1st)  *Paṭhamaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't live disrespectful and irreverent toward the
Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, or the training. They
can't establish their belief on unreliable grounds. And they can't
generate an eighth rebirth. These are the six things that can't be
done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.93 Things That Can't Be Done (2nd)  *Dutiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't take conditions to be permanent. They cannot
take conditions to be happiness. They cannot take anything to be the
self. They can't do deeds with fixed result in the next life. They can't
fall back on purification through boisterous, superstitious rites. They
can't seek outside of the Buddhist community for those worthy of
religious donations. These are the six things that can't be done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.94 Things That Can't Be Done (3rd)  *Tatiyaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't murder their mother or father or a perfected
one. They can't maliciously shed the blood of the Realized One. They
can't cause a schism in the Saṅgha. They can't dedicate
themselves to another teacher. These are the six things that can't be
done."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.95 Things That Can't Be Done (4th)  *Catutthaabhabbaṭṭhānasutta*

"Mendicants, these six things can't be done. What six? A person
accomplished in view can't fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
are made by oneself, or that they're made by another, or that they're
made by both. Nor can they fall back on the idea that pleasure and pain
arise by chance, not made by oneself, by another, or by both. Why is
that? It is because a person accomplished in view has clearly seen
causes and the phenomena that arise from causes. These are the six
things that can't be done."

## The Chapter on Benefit

### N 6.96 Appearance  *Pātubhāvasutta*

"Mendicants, the appearance of six things is rare in the world. What
six? A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha. A teacher
of the teaching and training proclaimed by a Realized One. Rebirth in a
civilized region. Unimpaired sense faculties. Being bright and clever.
Enthusiasm for skillful qualities. The appearance of these six things is
rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.97 Benefit  *Ānisaṁsasutta*

"Mendicants, these are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry. What six? You're bound for the true teaching. You're not
liable to decline. You suffer only for a limited period. You have
unshared knowledge. You've clearly seen causes and the phenomena that
arise from causes. These are the six benefits of realizing the fruit of
stream-entry."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.98 Impermanence  *Aniccasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as permanent to accept views that conform with the teaching.
Without accepting views that conform with the teaching, it's impossible
to enter the sure path. Without entering the sure path, it's impossible
to realize the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or
perfection.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
impermanent to accept views that conform with the teaching. Having
accepted views that conform with the teaching, it's possible to enter
the sure path. Having entered the sure path, it's possible to realize
the fruit of stream-entry, once-return, non-return, or perfection."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.99 Suffering  *Dukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as pleasurable to accept views that agree with the teaching.
... It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards all conditions as
suffering to accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.100 Not-Self  *Anattasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards any
condition as self to accept views that agree with the teaching. ... It's
quite possible for a mendicant who regards all things as not-self to
accept views that agree with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.101 Extinguished  *Nibbānasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a mendicant who regards
extinguishment as suffering to accept views that conform with the
teaching. ...

It's quite possible for a mendicant who regards extinguishment as
pleasurable to accept views that conform with the teaching. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.102 Transience  *Anavatthitasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of impermanence in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'All conditions will appear to me as transient.' 'My mind will not
delight anywhere in the world.' 'My mind will rise above the whole
world.' 'My mind will incline to extinguishment.' 'My fetters will be
given up.' 'I will achieve the ultimate goal of the ascetic life.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
impermanence in all conditions without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.103 With a Drawn Sword  *Ukkhittāsikasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of suffering in all conditions without qualification. What
six? 'Perception of disillusionment will be established in me for all
conditions, like a killer with a drawn sword.' 'My mind will rise above
the whole world.' 'I will see extinguishment as peaceful.' 'My
underlying tendencies will be uprooted.' 'I will fulfill my duty.' 'I
will have served my Teacher with love.' Seeing these six benefits is
quite enough to establish the perception of suffering in all conditions
without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.104 Not Determined by Anything  *Atammayasutta*

"Mendicants, seeing six benefits is quite enough to establish the
perception of not-self in all things without qualification. What six? 'I
will not be determined by anything in the world.' 'My I-making will
stop.' 'My mine-making will stop.' 'I will have unshared knowledge.' 'I
will clearly see causes and the phenomena that arise from causes.'
Seeing these six benefits is quite enough to establish the perception of
not-self in all things without qualification."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.105 States of Existence  *Bhavasutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up these three states of existence. And you
should train in three trainings. What are the three states of existence
you should give up? Existence in the sensual realm, the realm of
luminous form, and the formless realm. These are the three states of
existence you should give up. What are the three trainings you should
train in? The training in the higher ethics, the higher mind, and the
higher wisdom. These are the three trainings you should train in. When a
mendicant has given up these three states of existence and has trained
in these three trainings they're called a mendicant who has cut off
craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly comprehending conceit has
made an end of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.106 Craving  *Taṇhāsutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up these three cravings and three conceits.
What three cravings should you give up? Craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. These are
the three cravings you should give up. What three conceits should you
give up? Conceit, inferiority complex, and superiority complex. These
are the three conceits you should give up. When a mendicant has given up
these three cravings and these three conceits they're called a mendicant
who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by rightly
comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering."

## The Chapter on Triads

### N 6.107 Greed  *Rāgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Greed, hate, and
delusion. These are the three things. To give up these three things you
should develop three things. What three? You should develop the
perception of ugliness to give up greed, love to give up hate, and
wisdom to give up delusion. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.108 Bad Conduct  *Duccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Bad conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop good bodily conduct to give up bad bodily conduct, good
verbal conduct to give up bad verbal conduct, and good mental conduct to
give up bad mental conduct. These are the three things you should
develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.109 Thoughts  *Vitakkasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel thoughts. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop thoughts of renunciation to give up sensual thoughts,
thoughts of good will to give up malicious thoughts, and thoughts of
harmlessness to give up cruel thoughts. These are the three things you
should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.110 Perceptions  *Saññāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Sensual,
malicious, and cruel perceptions. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop perceptions of renunciation to give up sensual
perceptions, perceptions of good will to give up malicious perceptions,
and perceptions of harmlessness to give up cruel perceptions. These are
the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.111 Elements  *Dhātusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The elements of
sensuality, malice, and cruelty. These are the three things. To give up
these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop the element of renunciation to give up the element of
sensuality, the element of good will to give up the element of malice,
and the element of harmlessness to give up the element of cruelty. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.112 Gratification  *Assādasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? The view that
things are gratifying, the view of self, and wrong view. These are the
three things. To give up these three things you should develop three
things. What three? You should develop the perception of impermanence to
give up the view that things are gratifying; the perception of not-self
to give up the view of self; and right view to give up wrong view. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.113 Discontent  *Aratisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Discontent,
cruelty, and unprincipled conduct. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop rejoicing to give up discontent, harmlessness to give up
cruelty, and principled conduct to give up unprincipled conduct. These
are the three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.114 Contentment  *Santuṭṭhitāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Lack of
contentment, lack of situational awareness, and having many wishes.
These are the three things. To give up these three things you should
develop three things. What three? You should develop contentment to give
up lack of contentment, situational awareness to give up lack of
situational awareness, and having few wishes to give up having many
wishes. These are the three things you should develop to give up those
three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.115 Hard to Admonish  *Dovacassatāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Being hard to
admonish, bad friendship, and a scattered mind. These are the three
things. To give up these three things you should develop three things.
What three? You should develop being easy to admonish to give up being
hard to admonish, good friendship to give up bad friendship, and
mindfulness of breathing to give up a scattered mind. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.116 Restlessness  *Uddhaccasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three things. What three? Restlessness,
lack of restraint, and negligence. These are the three things. To give
up these three things you should develop three things. What three? You
should develop serenity to give up restlessness, restraint to give up
lack of restraint, and diligence to give up negligence. These are the
three things you should develop to give up those three things."

## The Chapter on the Ascetic Life

### N 6.117 Observing the Body  *Kāyānupassīsutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up these six qualities you can't meditate
observing an aspect of the body. What six? Relishing work, talk, sleep,
and company, not guarding the sense doors, and eating too much. Without
giving up these six qualities you can't meditate observing an aspect of
the body.

But after giving up these six qualities you can meditate observing an
aspect of the body. What six? Relishing work, talk, sleep, and company,
not guarding the sense doors, and eating too much. After giving up these
six qualities you can meditate observing an aspect of the body."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.118 Observing Principles, Etc.  *Dhammānupassīsutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up six things you can't meditate observing
an aspect of the body internally ... body externally ... body internally
and externally ... feelings internally ... feelings externally ...
feelings internally and externally ... mind internally ... mind
externally ... mind internally and externally ... principles internally
... principles externally ... principles internally and externally. What
six? Relishing work, talk, sleep, and company, not guarding the sense
doors, and eating too much. After giving up these six qualities you can
meditate observing an aspect of principles internally and externally."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.119 About Tapussa  *Tapussasutta*

"Mendicants, having six qualities the householder Tapussa is certain
about the Realized One, sees freedom from death and lives having
realized freedom from death. What six? Experiential confidence in the
Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and noble ethics,
knowledge, and freedom. Having these six qualities the householder
Tapussa is certain about the Realized One, sees freedom from death and
lives having realized freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.120--139 About Bhallika, Etc.  *Bhallikādisutta*

"Mendicants, having six qualities the householders Bhallika ... Sudatta
Anāthapiṇḍika ... Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa ...
Hatthaka of Āḷavī ... Mahānāma the Sakyan ...
Ugga of Vesālī ... Uggata ... Sūrambaṭṭha ...
Jīvaka Komārabhacca ... Nakula's father ...
Tavakaṇṇika ... Pūraṇa ... Isidatta ...
Sandhāna ... Vijaya ... Vijayamāhita ...
Meṇḍaka ... the lay followers Vāseṭṭha ...
Ariṭṭha ... and Sāragga are certain about the
Realized One, see freedom from death and live having realized freedom
from death. What six? Experiential confidence in the Buddha, the
teaching, and the Saṅgha, and noble ethics, knowledge, and
freedom. Having these six qualities the lay follower
Sāragga is certain about the Realized One, sees freedom
from death and lives having realized freedom from death."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### N 6.140 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
unsurpassable seeing, listening, acquisition, training, service, and
recollection. For insight into greed, these six things should be
developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.141 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
recollection of the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
ethics, generosity, and the deities. For insight into greed, these six
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.142 Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, six things should be developed. What six? The
perception of impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence,
the perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up,
the perception of fading away, and the perception of cessation. For
insight into greed, these six things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.143--169 Untitled Discourses on Greed, Etc.  *\~*

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of greed these six things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 6.170--649 Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc.  *\~*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
insight into negligence ... complete understanding ... complete ending
... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ...
giving away ... letting go of negligence these six things should be
developed."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE SIXES IS FINISHED.
:::

## Colophon

### The Translator

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

<!--pg-->
### Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the
Pali Tipiṭaka. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

<!--pg-->
### The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

<!--pg-->
### About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.
