# DN 1 The Divine Net *Brahmajālasutta*

## 1. Talk on Wanderers

[So I have heard.[^1]]{.smallcaps} At one time the Buddha was traveling
along the road between Rājagaha and Nāḷandā
together with a large Saṅgha of five hundred
mendicants.[^2] The wanderer Suppiya was also traveling along the same
road, together with his resident pupil, the student Brahmadatta.[^3]
Meanwhile, Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha in many ways,[^4] but his pupil Brahmadatta praised
them in many ways.[^5] And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the
Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting
each other.

Then the Buddha took up residence for the night in the royal rest-house
in Ambalaṭṭhikā together with the Saṅgha of
mendicants.[^6] And Suppiya and Brahmadatta did likewise. There too,
Suppiya criticized the Buddha, the teaching, and the Saṅgha
in many ways, but his pupil Brahmadatta praised them in many ways. And
so both tutor and pupil kept on directly contradicting each other.

Then several mendicants rose at the crack of dawn and sat together in
the pavilion, where the topic of judgmentalism came up:[^7]

"It's incredible, reverends, it's amazing how the diverse convictions of
sentient beings have been clearly comprehended by the Blessed One, who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.[^8] For
this Suppiya criticizes the Buddha, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha in many ways, while his pupil Brahmadatta praises
them in many ways. And so both tutor and pupil followed behind the
Buddha and the Saṅgha of mendicants directly contradicting
each other."

When the Buddha found out about this discussion on judgmentalism among
the mendicants, he went to the pavilion, where he sat on the seat spread
out and addressed the mendicants,[^9] "Mendicants, what were you sitting
talking about just now? What conversation was left unfinished?"[^10]

The mendicants told him what had happened, adding,[^11] "This was our
conversation that was unfinished when the Buddha arrived."

"Mendicants, if others criticize me, the teaching, or the
Saṅgha, don't make yourselves resentful, bitter, and
exasperated.[^12] You'll get angry and upset, which would be an obstacle
for you alone.[^13] If others were to criticize me, the teaching, or the
Saṅgha, and you got angry and upset, would you be able to
understand whether they spoke well or poorly?"[^14]

"No, sir."

"If others criticize me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you
should explain that what is untrue is in fact untrue: 'This is why
that's untrue, this is why that's false. There's no such thing in us,
it's not found among us.'

If others praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, don't
make yourselves thrilled, elated, and excited. You'll get thrilled,
elated, and excited, which would be an obstacle for you alone. If others
praise me, the teaching, or the Saṅgha, you should
acknowledge that what is true is in fact true: 'This is why that's true,
this is why that's correct. There is such a thing in us, it is found
among us.'

<!--pg-->
## 2. Ethics

### 2.1. The Shorter Section on Ethics

When an ordinary person speaks praise of the Realized One, they speak
only of trivial, insignificant details of mere ethics.[^15] And what are
the trivial, insignificant details of mere ethics that an ordinary
person speaks of?[^16]

'The ascetic Gotama has given up killing living creatures. He has
renounced the rod and the sword. He's scrupulous and kind, living full
of sympathy for all living beings.'[^17] Such is an ordinary person's
praise of the Realized One.[^18]

'The ascetic Gotama has given up stealing. He takes only what's given,
and expects only what's given. He keeps himself clean by not thieving.'
Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up unchastity. He is celibate, set apart,
avoiding the vulgar act of sex.'[^19] Such is an ordinary person's
praise of the Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up lying. He speaks the truth and sticks
to the truth. He's honest and dependable, and doesn't trick the world
with his words.'[^20] Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up divisive speech. He doesn't repeat in
one place what he heard in another so as to divide people against each
other. Instead, he reconciles those who are divided, supporting unity,
delighting in harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote
harmony.'[^21] Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up harsh speech. He speaks in a way that's
mellow, pleasing to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable
and agreeable to the people.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'The ascetic Gotama has given up talking nonsense. His words are timely,
true, and meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. He says
things at the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and
beneficial.'[^22] Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'The ascetic Gotama refrains from injuring plants and seeds.'[^23]

'He eats in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night and
food at the wrong time.'[^24]

'He refrains from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music .'[^25]

'He refrains from beautifying and adorning himself with garlands,
fragrance, and makeup.'[^26]

'He refrains from high and luxurious beds.'[^27]

'He refrains from receiving gold and currency,[^28] raw grains,[^29] raw
meat, women and girls, male and female bondservants,[^30] goats and
sheep,[^31] chickens and pigs, elephants, cows, horses, and mares, and
fields and land.'[^32]

'He refrains from running errands and messages;[^33] buying and
selling;[^34] falsifying weights, metals, or measures; bribery, fraud,
cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder, abduction, banditry,
plunder, and violence.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

_*The shorter section on ethics is finished.*_

<!--pg-->
### 2.2. The Middle Section on Ethics

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in injuring plants and seeds.[^35] These include
plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or joints; and those from
regular seeds as the fifth.[^36] The ascetic Gotama refrains from such
injury to plants and seeds.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in storing up goods for their own use.[^37] This
includes such things as food, drink, clothes, vehicles, bedding,
fragrance, and things of the flesh. The ascetic Gotama refrains from
storing up such goods.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in seeing shows. This includes such things as
dancing, singing, music, performances, and storytelling; clapping,
gongs, and kettledrums; beauty pageants; pole-acrobatics and
bone-washing displays of the corpse-workers; battles of elephants,
horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, chickens, and quails;
staff-fights, boxing, and wrestling; combat, roll calls of the armed
forces, battle-formations, and regimental reviews.[^38] The ascetic
Gotama refrains from such shows.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of
the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in gambling that causes negligence.[^39] This
includes such things as checkers with eight or ten rows, checkers in the
air, hopscotch, spillikins, board-games, tip-cat, drawing straws, dice,
leaf-flutes, toy plows, somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts,
toy bows, guessing words from syllables, guessing another's thoughts,
and imitating musical instruments.[^40] The ascetic Gotama refrains from
such gambling.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still make use of high and luxurious bedding. This includes such
things as sofas, couches, woolen covers---shag-piled, colorful, white,
embroidered with flowers, quilted, embroidered with animals, double- or
single-fringed---and silk covers studded with gems, as well as silken
sheets, woven carpets, rugs for elephants, horses, or chariots, antelope
hide rugs, and spreads of fine deer hide, with a canopy above and red
cushions at both ends. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such bedding.'
Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in beautifying and adorning themselves with
garlands, fragrance, and makeup. This includes such things as applying
beauty products by anointing, massaging, bathing, and rubbing; mirrors,
ointments, garlands, fragrances, and makeup; face-powder, foundation,
bracelets, headbands, fancy walking-sticks or containers, rapiers,
parasols, fancy sandals, turbans, jewelry, chowries, and long-fringed
white robes. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such beautification and
adornment.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in low talk. This includes such topics as[^41] talk
about kings, bandits, and ministers; talk about armies, threats, and
wars; talk about food, drink, clothes, and beds; talk about garlands and
fragrances; talk about family, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, and
countries; talk about women and heroes; street talk and well talk; talk
about the departed; motley talk; tales of land and sea; and talk about
being reborn in this or that place.[^42] The ascetic Gotama refrains
from such low talk.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in arguments. They say such things as: "You don't
understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching and
training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You're
practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You
said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. What you've thought so much about has been
disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're
trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"[^43] The ascetic Gotama
refrains from such argumentative talk.' Such is an ordinary person's
praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in running errands and messages. This includes
running errands for rulers, ministers, aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, or princes who say: "Go here, go there. Take this, bring
that from there."[^44] The ascetic Gotama refrains from such errands.'
Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still engage in deceit, flattery, hinting, and belittling, and
using material things to chase after other material things.[^45] The
ascetic Gotama refrains from such deceit and flattery.' Such is an
ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

_*The middle section on ethics is finished.*_

<!--pg-->
### 2.3. The Large Section on Ethics

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood.[^46] This
includes such fields as limb-reading, omenology, divining celestial
portents, interpreting dreams, divining bodily marks, divining holes in
cloth gnawed by mice, fire offerings, ladle offerings, offerings of
husks, rice powder, rice, ghee, or oil; offerings from the mouth, blood
sacrifices, palmistry; geomancy for building sites, fields, and
cemeteries; exorcisms, earth magic, snake charming, poisons; the lore of
the scorpion, the rat, the bird, and the crow; prophesying lifespan,
chanting for protection, and divining omens from wild animals.[^47] The
ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such
is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes reading the marks of gems, cloth, clubs, swords, spears,
arrows, bows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female
bondservants, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams,
chickens, quails, monitor lizards, rabbits, tortoises, or deer.[^48] The
ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such
is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that the king will march forth or march
back; or that our king will attack and the enemy king will retreat, or
vice versa; or that our king will triumph and the enemy king will be
defeated, or vice versa; and so there will be victory for one and defeat
for the other. The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such
wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making predictions that there will be an eclipse of the moon,
or sun, or stars; that the sun, moon, and stars will be in conjunction
or in opposition; that there will be a meteor shower, a fiery sky, an
earthquake, or thunder in the heavens; that there will be a rising, a
setting, a darkening, a brightening of the moon, sun, and stars. And it
also includes making predictions about the results of all such
phenomena.[^49] The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such
wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized
One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes predicting whether there will be plenty of rain or drought;
plenty to eat or famine; an abundant harvest or a bad harvest; security
or peril; sickness or health. It also includes such occupations as
arithmetic, accounting, calculating, poetry, and cosmology.[^50] The
ascetic Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such
is an ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes making arrangements for giving and taking in marriage; for
engagement and divorce; and for scattering rice inwards or outwards at
the wedding ceremony. It also includes casting spells for good or bad
luck, treating impacted fetuses, binding the tongue, or locking the
jaws; charms for the hands and ears; questioning a mirror, a girl, or a
god as an oracle; worshiping the sun, worshiping the Great One,
breathing fire, and invoking Siri, the goddess of luck.[^51] The ascetic
Gotama refrains from such low lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an
ordinary person's praise of the Realized One.

'There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for
the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and
consecrating house sites, and rites involving rinsing and bathing, and
oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives,
expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye
restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery
with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines,
and binding on herbs.[^52] The ascetic Gotama refrains from such low
lore, such wrong livelihood.' Such is an ordinary person's praise of the
Realized One.

These are the trivial, insignificant details of mere ethics that an
ordinary person speaks of when they speak praise of the Realized One.

_*The longer section on ethics is finished.*_

<!--pg-->
## 3. Views

### 3.1. Theories About the Past

There are other principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. Those who genuinely praise the Realized One would
rightly speak of these things.[^53] And what are these principles?

<!--pg-->
There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past, and
assert various hypotheses concerning the past on eighteen grounds. And
what are the eighteen grounds on which they rely?

#### 3.1.1. Eternalism

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are eternalists, who assert
that the self and the cosmos are eternal on four grounds.[^54] And what
are the four grounds on which they rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
recollect their many kinds of past lives.[^55] That is: one, two, three,
four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.[^56]

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.[^57] They remain the same
for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate
and pass away and rearise.[^58] Why is that? Because by dint of keen,
resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind
I experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect
my many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I know:[^59]

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the first ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is:
one eon of the cosmos contracting and expanding; two, three, four, five,
or ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember:
'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that
was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my
life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere
else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn here.' And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.[^60]

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all
eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass
away and rearise. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my
many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I know:

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they recollect their many kinds of past lives. That is:
ten eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding; twenty, thirty, or
forty eons of the cosmos contracting and expanding. They remember:
'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that
was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my
life ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere
else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was that, I looked like
this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and
that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place I was
reborn here.' And so they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with
features and details.

They say: 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a
mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all
eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass
away and rearise. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I recollect my
many kinds of past lives, with features and details.

Because of this I know:

"The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady as a mountain peak,
standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same for all eternity,
while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate and pass away and
rearise."' This is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective:[^61] 'The self and the cosmos are eternal, barren, steady
as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They remain the same
for all eternity, while these sentient beings wander and transmigrate
and pass away and rearise.' This is the fourth ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
eternal.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self and the cosmos are eternal. Any ascetics and brahmins who
assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is none.[^62]

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.'[^63] He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he
does not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching
within himself.[^64] Having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is
freed through not grasping.[^65]

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

_*The first recitation section.[^66]*_

<!--pg-->
#### 3.1.2. Partial Eternalism

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are partial eternalists, who
assert that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially
not eternal on four grounds.[^67] And what are the four grounds on which
they rely?

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos contracts.[^68] As the cosmos contracts, sentient beings are
mostly headed for the realm of streaming radiance.[^69] There they are
mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.[^70]

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, this
cosmos expands.[^71] As it expands an empty mansion of divinity
appears.[^72] Then a certain sentient being---due to the running out of
their lifespan or merit---passes away from that host of radiant deities
and is reborn in that empty mansion of divinity.[^73] There they are
mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time.

But after staying there all alone for a long time, they become
dissatisfied and anxious:[^74] 'Oh, if only other beings would come to
this place.' Then other sentient beings---due to the running out of
their lifespan or merit---pass away from that host of radiant deities
and are reborn in that mansion of divinity in company with that
being.[^75] There they too are mind-made, feeding on rapture,
self-luminous, wandering in midair, steadily glorious, and they remain
like that for a very long time.

Now, the being who was reborn there first thinks: 'I am the Divinity,
the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the Universal
Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the
First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those who have been
born and those yet to be born.[^76] These beings were created by
me![^77] Why is that? Because first I thought:

"Oh, if only other beings would come to this place." Such was my heart's
wish, and then these creatures came to this place.'[^78]

And the beings who were reborn there later also think: 'This must be the
Divinity, the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher, the Unvanquished, the
Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God Almighty, the Maker, the
Creator, the First, the Begetter, the Controller, the Father of those
who have been born and those yet to be born. And we were created by him.
Why is that? Because we see that he was reborn here first, and we
arrived later.'[^79]

And the being who was reborn first is more long-lived, beautiful, and
illustrious than those who arrived later.

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.[^80]

They say: 'He who is the Divinity---the Great Divinity, the Vanquisher,
the Unvanquished, the Universal Seer, the Wielder of Power, God
Almighty, the Maker, the Creator, the First, the Begetter, the
Controller, the Father of those who have been born and those yet to be
born---by he we were created. He is permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity. We who were created
by that Divinity are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to
pass away, and have come to this place.'[^81] This is the first ground
on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the
cosmos are partially eternal.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? There are gods named
'depraved by play.' They spend too much time laughing, playing, and
making merry. And in doing so, they lose their mindfulness, and they
pass away from that host of gods.[^82]

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: 'The gods not depraved by play don't spend too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. So they don't lose their
mindfulness, and don't pass away from that host of gods. They are
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for
all eternity. But we who were depraved by play spent too much time
laughing, playing, and making merry. In doing so, we lost our
mindfulness, and passed away from that host of gods. We are impermanent,
not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and have come to this
place.'[^83] This is the second ground on which some ascetics and
brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are partially
eternal.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? There are gods named
'malevolent'. They spend too much time gazing at each other, so they
grow angry with each other, and their bodies and minds get tired. They
pass away from that host of gods.[^84]

It's possible that one of those beings passes away from that host and is
reborn in this place. Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to
homelessness. By dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart
of such a kind that they recollect that past life, but no further.

They say: 'The gods who are not malevolent don't spend too much time
gazing at each other, so they don't grow angry with each other, their
bodies and minds don't get tired, and they don't pass away from that
host of gods. They are permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable,
remaining the same for all eternity. But we who were malevolent spent
too much time gazing at each other, we grew angry with each other, our
bodies and minds got tired, and we passed away from that host of gods.
We are impermanent, not lasting, short-lived, liable to pass away, and
have come to this place.' This is the third ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos are
partially eternal.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'That which is called "the eye", "the ear", "the nose",
"the tongue", and also "the body": that self is impermanent, not
lasting, transient, perishable. That which is called "mind" or
"sentience" or "consciousness": that self is permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, remaining the same for all eternity.'[^85] This
is the fourth ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert
that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self and the cosmos are partially eternal and partially not
eternal. Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self and the
cosmos are partially eternal and partially not eternal do so on one or
other of these four grounds. Outside of this there is none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.1.3. The Cosmos is Finite or Infinite

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about size, and assert
that the cosmos is finite or infinite on four grounds.[^86] And what are
the four grounds on which they rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of
mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of such a kind that they
meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite.[^87]

They say: 'The cosmos is finite and bounded. Why is that? Because by
dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right
application of mind I experience an immersion of the heart of such a
kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite.[^88] Because of
this I know:

"The cosmos is finite and bounded."' This is the first ground on which
some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is finite or
infinite.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they meditate perceiving the cosmos as infinite.[^89]

They say: 'The cosmos is infinite and unbounded. The ascetics and
brahmins who say that the cosmos is finite are wrong.[^90] The cosmos is
infinite and unbounded. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute,
committed, and diligent effort, and right application of mind I
experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that I meditate
perceiving the cosmos as infinite. Because of this I know:

"The cosmos is infinite and unbounded."' This is the second ground on
which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is
finite or infinite.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin---by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort,
and right application of mind---experiences an immersion of the heart of
such a kind that they meditate perceiving the cosmos as finite
vertically but infinite horizontally.[^91]

They say: 'The cosmos is both finite and infinite. The ascetics and
brahmins who say that the cosmos is finite are wrong, and so are those
who say that the cosmos is infinite. The cosmos is both finite and
infinite. Why is that? Because by dint of keen, resolute, committed, and
diligent effort, and right application of mind I experience an immersion
of the heart of such a kind that I meditate perceiving the cosmos as
finite vertically but infinite horizontally. Because of this I know:

"The cosmos is both finite and infinite."' This is the third ground on
which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is
finite or infinite.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'The cosmos is neither finite nor infinite.[^92] The
ascetics and brahmins who say that the cosmos is finite are wrong, as
are those who say that the cosmos is infinite, and also those who say
that the cosmos is both finite and infinite. The cosmos is neither
finite nor infinite.' This is the fourth ground on which some ascetics
and brahmins rely to assert that the cosmos is finite or infinite.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the cosmos is finite or infinite. Any ascetics and brahmins who
assert that the cosmos is finite or infinite do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.1.4. Endless Flip-floppers

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are endless flip-floppers.
Whenever they're asked a question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops on four grounds.[^93] And what are the four grounds
on which they rely?

It's when some ascetic or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is
skillful and what is unskillful.[^94] They think: 'I don't truly
understand what is skillful and what is unskillful. If I were to declare
that something was skillful or unskillful I might be wrong. That would
be stressful for me, and that stress would be an obstacle.' So from fear
and disgust with false speech they avoid stating whether something is
skillful or unskillful. Whenever they're asked a question, they resort
to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops:[^95] 'I don't say it's like
this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't
say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so.'[^96] This is the first
ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal
flip-flops and endless flip-flops.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful. They think: 'I don't truly understand what is skillful and
what is unskillful. If I were to declare that something was skillful or
unskillful I might feel desire or greed or hate or repulsion.[^97] That
would be grasping on my part. That would be stressful for me, and that
stress would be an obstacle.' So from fear and disgust with grasping
they avoid stating whether something is skillful or unskillful. Whenever
they're asked a question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and endless
flip-flops: 'I don't say it's like this. I don't say it's like that. I
don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's
not so.' This is the second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins
rely when resorting to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops.

And what is the third ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin doesn't truly understand what is skillful and what is
unskillful. They think: 'I don't truly understand what is skillful and
what is unskillful. Suppose I were to declare that something was
skillful or unskillful. There are clever ascetics and brahmins who are
subtle, accomplished in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd
think they live to demolish convictions with their intellect.[^98] They
might pursue, press, and grill me about that. I'd be stumped by such a
grilling. That would be stressful for me, and that stress would be an
obstacle.' So from fear and disgust with examination they avoid stating
whether something is skillful or unskillful. Whenever they're asked a
question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops: 'I
don't say it's like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's
otherwise. I don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so.' This
is the third ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely when
resorting to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops.

And what is the fourth ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin is dull and stupid.[^99] Because of that, whenever they're
asked a question, they resort to verbal flip-flops and endless
flip-flops: 'Suppose you were to ask me whether there is another world.
If I believed that to be the case, I would say so.[^100] But I don't say
it's like this. I don't say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise.
I don't say it's not so. And I don't deny it's not so. Suppose you were
to ask me whether there is no other world ...[^101] whether there both
is and is not another world ...[^102] whether there neither is nor is
not another world ...[^103] whether there are beings who are reborn
spontaneously ...[^104] whether there are not beings who are reborn
spontaneously ...[^105] whether there both are and are not beings who
are reborn spontaneously ...[^106] whether there neither are nor are not
beings who are reborn spontaneously ...[^107] whether there is fruit and
result of good and bad deeds ...[^108] whether there is no fruit and
result of good and bad deeds ...[^109] whether there both is and is not
fruit and result of good and bad deeds ...[^110] whether there neither
is nor is not fruit and result of good and bad deeds ...[^111] whether a
realized one still exists after death ...[^112] whether A realized one
no longer exists after death ...[^113] whether a realized one both still
exists and no longer exists after death ...[^114] whether a Realized One
neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. If I believed that to be
the case, I would say so.[^115] But I don't say it's like this. I don't
say it's like that. I don't say it's otherwise. I don't say it's not so.
And I don't deny it's not so.' This is the fourth ground on which some
ascetics and brahmins rely when resorting to verbal flip-flops and
endless flip-flops.

These are the four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who are
flip-floppers resort to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops
whenever they're asked a question. Any ascetics and brahmins who resort
to verbal flip-flops and endless flip-flops do so on one or other of
these four grounds. Outside of this there is none. The Realized One
understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.1.5. Doctrines of Origination by Chance

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about chance. They
assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two grounds. And
what are the two grounds on which they rely?

There are gods named 'non-percipient beings'.[^116] When perception
arises they pass away from that host of gods. It's possible that one of
those beings passes away from that host and is reborn in this place.
Having done so, they go forth from the lay life to homelessness. By dint
of keen, resolute, committed, and diligent effort, and right application
of mind, they experience an immersion of the heart of such a kind that
they recollect the arising of perception, but no further. They say: 'The
self and the cosmos arose by chance. Why is that? Because formerly I
didn't exist, whereas now, having not existed, I've transformed into the
state of existing." This is the first ground on which some ascetics and
brahmins rely to assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance.

And what is the second ground on which they rely? It's when some ascetic
or brahmin relies on logic and inquiry. They speak of what they have
worked out by logic, following a line of inquiry, expressing their own
perspective: 'The self and the cosmos arose by chance.' This is the
second ground on which some ascetics and brahmins rely to assert that
the self and the cosmos arose by chance.

These are the two grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about chance assert that the self and the cosmos arose by
chance. Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about chance do so on one
or other of these two grounds. Outside of this there is none. The
Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the
Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
These are the eighteen grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about the past assert various hypotheses concerning the
past.[^117] Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past do so
on one or other of these eighteen grounds. Outside of this there is
none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.' He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since he does
not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching within
himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is freed through
not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

_*The second recitation section.*_

<!--pg-->
### 3.2. Theories About the Future

There are some ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the future, and
assert various hypotheses concerning the future on forty-four
grounds.[^118] And what are the forty-four grounds on which they rely?

#### 3.2.1. Percipient Life After Death

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form on
sixteen grounds. And what are the sixteen grounds on which they rely?

They assert: 'The self is healthy and percipient after death, and it is
formed ...[^119]

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite ...

of unified perception ...

of diverse perception ...

of limited perception ...

of limitless perception ...

experiences nothing but happiness ...

experiences nothing but suffering ...

experiences both happiness and suffering ...

experiences neither happiness nor suffering.'

These are the sixteen grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins
assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form. Any
ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self lives on after death in a
percipient form do so on one or other of these sixteen grounds. Outside
of this there is none. The Realized One understands this ... And those
who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these
things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.2.2. Non-Percipient Life After Death

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form
on eight grounds. And what are the eight grounds on which they rely?

They assert: 'The self is healthy and non-percipient after death, and it
is formed ...[^120]

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite.'

These are the eight grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form. Any
ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self lives on after death in a
non-percipient form do so on one or other of these eight grounds.
Outside of this there is none. The Realized One understands this ... And
those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these
things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.2.3. Neither Percipient Nor Non-Percipient Life After Death

There are some ascetics and brahmins who say there is life after death,
and assert that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient
nor non-percipient form on eight grounds.[^121] And what are the eight
grounds on which they rely?

They assert: 'The self is healthy and neither percipient nor
non-percipient after death, and it is formed ...

formless ...

both formed and formless ...

neither formed nor formless ...

finite ...

infinite ...

both finite and infinite ...

neither finite nor infinite.'

These are the eight grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form. Any ascetics and brahmins who assert that the self
lives on after death in a neither percipient nor non-percipient form do
so on one or other of these eight grounds. Outside of this there is
none. The Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely
praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.2.4. Annihilationism

There are some ascetics and brahmins who are annihilationists. They
assert the annihilation, eradication, and obliteration of an existing
being on seven grounds.[^122] And what are the seven grounds on which
they rely?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'This self is formed, made up of the four principal states, and produced
by mother and father. Since it's annihilated and destroyed when the body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes
rightly annihilated.'[^123] That is how some assert the annihilation of
an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it.[^124] But that's not how *this* self becomes
rightly annihilated. There is another self that is heavenly, formed,
sensual, consuming solid food.[^125] You don't know or see that. But I
know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when
the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self
becomes rightly annihilated.'[^126] That is how some assert the
annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that is heavenly, formed, mind-made,
whole in its major and minor limbs, not deficient in any faculty.[^127]
You don't know or see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is
annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist
after death, that's how this self becomes rightly annihilated.' That is
how some assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self which has gone totally beyond
perceptions of form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not
focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that "space is infinite",
it's reborn in the dimension of infinite space.[^128] You don't know or
see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated and
destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death, that's
how this self becomes rightly annihilated.'[^129] That is how some
assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self which has gone totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space. Aware that "consciousness is infinite",
it's reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. You don't know
or see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated
and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death,
that's how this self becomes rightly annihilated.' That is how some
assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that has gone totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness. Aware that "there is nothing at
all", it's been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. You don't know
or see that. But I know it and see it. Since this self is annihilated
and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death,
that's how this self becomes rightly annihilated.' That is how some
assert the annihilation of an existing being.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self becomes rightly
annihilated. There is another self that has gone totally beyond the
dimension of nothingness. Aware that "this is peaceful, this is
sublime", it's been reborn in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[^130] You don't know or see that. But I know it and see
it. Since this self is annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks
up, and doesn't exist after death, that's how this self becomes rightly
annihilated.' That is how some assert the annihilation of an existing
being.

These are the seven grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
the annihilation, eradication, and obliteration of an existing being.
Any ascetics and brahmins who assert the annihilation, eradication, and
obliteration of an existing being do so on one or other of these seven
grounds. Outside of this there is none. The Realized One understands
this ... And those who genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly
speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
#### 3.2.5. Extinguishment of Suffering in This Life

There are some ascetics and brahmins who speak of extinguishment in this
life. They assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in this
life on five grounds.[^131] And what are the five grounds on which they
rely?

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'When this self amuses itself, supplied and provided with the five kinds
of sensual stimulation, that's how this self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life.'[^132] That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in this life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life. Why is that? Because sensual pleasures are
impermanent, suffering, and perishable. Their decay and perishing give
rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.[^133] Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
this self enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. That's how this self attains ultimate extinguishment in
this life.'[^134] That is how some assert ultimate extinguishment for an
existing being in this life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life.[^135] Why is that? Because the placing of
the mind and the keeping it connected there are coarse.[^136] But when
the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, this self
enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without
placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's how this self attains
ultimate extinguishment in this life.' That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in this life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life. Why is that? Because the rapture and
emotional elation there are coarse. But with the fading away of rapture,
this self enters and remains in the third absorption, where it meditates
with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, "Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss". That's how this self attains ultimate extinguishment in this
life.' That is how some assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing
being in this life.

But someone else says to them: '*That* self of which you speak does
exist, I don't deny it. But that's not how *this* self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life. Why is that? Because the mental partaking
of that as 'blissful' is said to be coarse.[^137] But giving up pleasure
and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, this self enters and
remains in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure
equanimity and mindfulness. That's how this self attains ultimate
extinguishment in this life.' That is how some assert ultimate
extinguishment for an existing being in this life.

These are the five grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins assert
ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in this life. Any ascetics
and brahmins who assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in
this life do so on one or other of these five grounds. Outside of this
there is none.[^138] The Realized One understands this ... And those who
genuinely praise the Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

These are the forty-four grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins
who theorize about the future assert various hypotheses concerning the
future. Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the future do so on
one or other of these forty-four grounds. Outside of this there is none.
The Realized One understands this ... And those who genuinely praise the
Realized One would rightly speak of these things.

These are the sixty-two grounds on which those ascetics and brahmins who
theorize about the past and the future assert various hypotheses
concerning the past and the future.

Any ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past or the future do
so on one or other of these sixty-two grounds. Outside of this there is
none.

The Realized One understands this: 'If you hold on to and attach to
these grounds for views it leads to such and such a destiny in the next
life.'[^139] He understands this, and what goes beyond this. And since
he does not misapprehend that understanding, he has realized quenching
within himself. Having truly understood the origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape from feelings, the Realized One is
freed through not grasping.

These are the principles---deep, hard to see, hard to understand,
peaceful, sublime, beyond the scope of logic, subtle, comprehensible to
the astute---which the Realized One makes known after realizing them
with his own insight. And those who genuinely praise the Realized One
would rightly speak of these things.

<!--pg-->
## 4. The Grounds For Assertions About the Self and the Cosmos

### 4.1. Anxiety and Evasiveness

Now, these things are only the feeling of those who do not know or see,
the anxiety and evasiveness of those under the sway of craving. Namely,
when those ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are
eternal on four grounds ...[^140]

partially eternal on four grounds ...

finite or infinite on four grounds ...

or they resort to flip-flops on four grounds ...

or they assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two
grounds ...

they theorize about the past on these eighteen grounds ...

or they assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form
on sixteen grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form on eight
grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form on eight grounds ...

or they assert the annihilation of an existing being on seven grounds
...

or they assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in this
life on five grounds ...

they theorize about the future on these forty-four grounds ...

When those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the future
on these sixty-two grounds, these things are only the feeling of those
who do not know or see, the anxiety and evasiveness of those under the
sway of craving.

<!--pg-->
### 4.2. Conditioned by Contact

Now, these things are conditioned by contact. Namely, when those
ascetics and brahmins assert that the self and the cosmos are eternal on
four grounds ...[^141]

partially eternal on four grounds ...

finite or infinite on four grounds ...

or they resort to flip-flops on four grounds ...

or they assert that the self and the cosmos arose by chance on two
grounds ...

they theorize about the past on these eighteen grounds ...

or they assert that the self lives on after death in a percipient form
on sixteen grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a non-percipient form on eight
grounds ...

or that the self lives on after death in a neither percipient nor
non-percipient form on eight grounds ...

or they assert the annihilation of an existing being on seven grounds
...

or they assert ultimate extinguishment for an existing being in this
life on five grounds ...

they theorize about the future on these forty-four grounds ...

When those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the future
on these sixty-two grounds, that too is conditioned by contact.

<!--pg-->
### 4.3. Not Possible

Now, when those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the
future on these sixty-two grounds, it is not possible that they should
experience these things without contact.[^142]

### 4.4. Dependent Origination

Now, when those ascetics and brahmins theorize about the past and the
future on these sixty-two grounds, all of them experience this by
repeated contact through the six fields of contact. Their feeling is a
condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is
a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition
for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.[^143]

<!--pg-->
## 5. The End of the Round

When a mendicant truly understands the six fields of contact's origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape, they understand what lies
beyond all these things.[^144]

All of these ascetics and brahmins who theorize about the past or the
future are trapped in the net of these sixty-two grounds, so that
wherever they emerge they are caught and trapped in this very net.[^145]

Suppose a deft fisherman or his apprentice were to cast a fine-meshed
net over a small pond. They'd think: 'Any sizable creatures in this pond
will be trapped in the net. Wherever they emerge they are caught and
trapped in this very net.'[^146] In the same way, all of these ascetics
and brahmins who theorize about the past or the future are trapped in
the net of these sixty-two grounds, so that wherever they emerge they
are caught and trapped in this very net.

The Realized One's body remains, but his conduit to rebirth has been cut
off.[^147] As long as his body remains he will be seen by gods and
humans. But when his body breaks up, after life has ended, gods and
humans will see him no more.

When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to
the stalk will follow along.[^148] In the same way, the Realized One's
body remains, but his conduit to rebirth has been cut off. As long as
his body remains he will be seen by gods and humans. But when his body
breaks up, after life has ended, gods and humans will see him no more."

When he had spoken, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha, "It's
incredible, sir, it's amazing! What is the name of this exposition of
the teaching?"

"Well then, Ānanda, you may remember this exposition of the teaching as
'The Net of Meaning', or else 'The Net of the Teaching', or else 'The
Divine Net', or else 'The Net of Views', or else 'The Supreme Victory in
Battle'."[^149]

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
ten-thousandfold galaxy shook.

