# The Lion's Roar to the Naked Ascetic Kassapa

_**Mahāsīhanādasutta**_

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Ujuññā, in the deer park at
Kaṇṇakatthala.[^477]

Then the naked ascetic Kassapa went up to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him.[^478] When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he stood to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, I have heard the following: 'The ascetic Gotama
criticizes all fervent mortification. He categorically condemns and
denounces all fervent mortifiers who live rough.'[^479] Do those who say
this repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an
untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there any
legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism? For we don't want to
misrepresent Mister Gotama."

"Kassapa, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false, baseless, and untrue. With
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, I see some fervent
mortifier who lives rough reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But I see another fervent mortifier who lives rough
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.[^480]

I see some fervent mortifier who takes it easy reborn in a place of
loss. But I see another fervent mortifier who takes it easy reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. Since I truly understand the coming and
going, passing away and rebirth of these fervent mortifiers in this way,
how could I criticize all forms of mortification, or categorically
condemn and denounce those fervent mortifiers who live rough?

There are some clever ascetics and brahmins who are subtle, accomplished
in the doctrines of others, hair-splitters. You'd think they live to
demolish convictions with their intellect. They agree with me in some
matters and disagree in others. Some of the things that they applaud, I
also applaud. Some of the things that they don't applaud, I also don't
applaud. But some of the things that they applaud, I don't applaud. And
some of the things that they don't applaud, I do applaud.

Some of the things that I applaud, others also applaud. Some of the
things that I don't applaud, they also don't applaud. But some of the
things that I don't applaud, others do applaud. And some of the things
that I do applaud, others don't applaud.

<!--pg-->
## 1. Examination

I go up to them and say: 'Let us leave aside those matters on which we
disagree.[^481] But there are some matters on which we agree. Regarding
these, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would compare
teacher with teacher or community with community:

"There are things that are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be
cultivated, unworthy of the noble ones, and dark---and are reckoned as
such. Who proceeds having totally given these things up: the ascetic
Gotama, or the tutors of other communities?"'[^482]

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama proceeds having
totally given those unskillful things up, compared with the tutors of
other communities.' And that's how, when sensible people pursue the
matter, they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are skillful, blameless, worth cultivating, worthy of the
noble ones, and bright---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds having
totally undertaken these things: the ascetic Gotama, or the tutors of
other communities?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama proceeds having
totally undertaken these things, compared with the tutors of other
communities.' And that's how, when sensible people pursue the matter,
they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are unskillful, blameworthy, not to be cultivated, unworthy
of the noble ones, and dark---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds
having totally given these things up: the ascetic Gotama's disciples, or
the disciples of other tutors?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama's disciples
proceed having totally given those unskillful things up, compared with
the disciples of other tutors.' And that's how, when sensible people
pursue the matter, they will mostly praise us.

In addition, sensible people, pursuing, pressing, and grilling, would
compare teacher with teacher or community with community: 'There are
things that are skillful, blameless, worth cultivating, worthy of the
noble ones, and bright---and are reckoned as such. Who proceeds having
totally undertaken these things: the ascetic Gotama's disciples, or the
disciples of other tutors?'

It's possible that they might say: 'The ascetic Gotama's disciples
proceed having totally undertaken those skillful things, compared with
the disciples of other tutors.' And that's how, when sensible people
pursue the matter, they will mostly praise us.

<!--pg-->
## 2. The Noble Eightfold Path

There is, Kassapa, a path, there is a practice, practicing in accordance
with which you will know and see for yourself: 'Only the ascetic
Gotama's words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with the
teaching and training.'[^483] And what is that path? It is simply this
noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right immersion. This is the path, this is the practice, practicing in
accordance with which you will know and see for yourself: 'Only the
ascetic Gotama's words are timely, true, and meaningful, in line with
the teaching and training.'"[^484]

<!--pg-->
## 3. The Courses of Fervent Mortification

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha:

"Reverend Gotama, those ascetics and brahmins consider these courses of
fervent mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or
brahmin.[^485] They go naked, ignoring conventions. They lick their
hands, and don't come or wait when called. They don't consent to food
brought to them, or food prepared on their behalf, or an invitation for
a meal.[^486] They don't receive anything from a pot or bowl; or from
someone who keeps sheep, or who has a weapon or a shovel in their home;
or where a couple is eating; or where there is a woman who is pregnant,
breastfeeding, or who lives with a man; or where there's a dog waiting
or flies buzzing. They accept no fish or meat or beer or wine, and drink
no fermented gruel.[^487] They go to just one house for alms, taking
just one mouthful, or two houses and two mouthfuls, up to seven houses
and seven mouthfuls. They feed on one saucer a day, two saucers a day,
up to seven saucers a day. They eat once a day, once every second day,
up to once a week, and so on, even up to once a fortnight. They live
committed to the practice of eating food at set intervals.

Those ascetics and brahmins also consider these courses of fervent
mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or brahmin. They
eat herbs, millet, wild rice, poor rice, water lettuce, rice bran, scum
from boiling rice, sesame flour, grass, or cow dung. They survive on
forest roots and fruits, or eating fallen fruit.[^488]

Those ascetics and brahmins also consider these courses of fervent
mortification to be what makes someone a true ascetic or brahmin. They
wear robes of sunn hemp, mixed hemp, corpse-wrapping cloth, rags, lodh
tree bark, antelope hide (whole or in strips), kusa grass, bark,
wood-chips, human hair, horse-tail hair, or owls' wings.[^489] They tear
out hair and beard, committed to this practice.[^490] They constantly
stand, refusing seats.[^491] They squat, committed to persisting in the
squatting position. They lie on a mat of thorns, making a mat of thorns
their bed. They make their bed on a plank, or the bare ground. They lie
only on one side. They wear dust and dirt.[^492] They stay in the open
air. They sleep wherever they lay their mat. They eat unnatural things,
committed to the practice of eating unnatural foods.[^493] They don't
drink, committed to the practice of not drinking liquids. They're
devoted to ritual bathing three times a day, including the
evening."[^494]

<!--pg-->
## 4. The Uselessness of Fervent Mortification

"Kassapa, someone may practice all those forms of mortification, but if
they haven't developed and realized any accomplishment in ethics, mind,
and wisdom, they are far from being a true ascetic or brahmin.[^495] But
take a mendicant who develops a heart of love, free of enmity and ill
will. And they realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by
wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements.[^496] When they achieve this,
they're a mendicant who is called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true
brahmin'. ..."

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "It's hard, Mister
Gotama, to be a true ascetic or a true brahmin."

"It's typical, Kassapa, in this world to think that it's hard to be a
true ascetic or brahmin. But someone might practice all those forms of
mortification. And if it was only because of just that much, only
because of that course of fervent mortification that it was so very hard
to be a true ascetic or brahmin, it wouldn't be appropriate to say that
it's hard to be a true ascetic or brahmin.

For it would be quite possible for a householder or a householder's
child---or even the bonded maid who carries the water-jar---to practice
all those forms of mortification.

It's because there's something other than just that much, something
other than that course of fervent mortification that it's so very hard
to be a true ascetic or brahmin. And that's why it is appropriate to say
that it's hard to be a true ascetic or brahmin. Take a mendicant who
develops a heart of love, free of enmity and ill will. And they realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life,
and live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements.[^497] When they achieve this, they're a mendicant who is
called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true brahmin'. ..."

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "It's hard, Mister
Gotama, to know a true ascetic or a true brahmin."

"It's typical in this world to think that it's hard to know a true
ascetic or brahmin. But someone might practice all those forms of
mortification. And if it was only by just that much, only by that course
of fervent mortification that it was so very hard to know a true ascetic
or brahmin, it wouldn't be appropriate to say that it's hard to know a
true ascetic or brahmin.

For it would be quite possible for a householder or a householder's
child---or even the bonded maid who carries the water-jar---to know that
someone is practicing all those forms of mortification.

It's because there's something other than just that much, something
other than that course of fervent mortification that it's so very hard
to know a true ascetic or brahmin. And that's why it is appropriate to
say that it's hard to know a true ascetic or brahmin. Take a mendicant
who develops a heart of love, free of enmity and ill will. And they
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due to the
ending of defilements. When they achieve this, they're a mendicant who
is called a 'true ascetic' and also 'a true brahmin'."

<!--pg-->
## 5. The Accomplishment of Ethics, Mind, and Wisdom

When he had spoken, Kassapa said to the Buddha, "But Mister Gotama, what
is that accomplishment in ethics, in mind, and in wisdom?"[^498]

"It's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... Seeing danger in the slightest fault, a mendicant
keeps the rules they've undertaken. They act skillfully by body and
speech. They're purified in livelihood and accomplished in ethical
conduct. They guard the sense doors, have mindfulness and situational
awareness, and are content.

And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a mendicant
gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword.
They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living
beings. This pertains to their accomplishment in ethics. ...

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. ... They
refrain from such low lore, such wrong livelihood. This pertains to
their accomplishment in ethics.

A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their ethical restraint. It's like a king who has defeated
his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. In the same
way, a mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any
quarter in regards to their ethical restraint. When they have this
entire spectrum of noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness
inside themselves. That's how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.
This, Kassapa, is that accomplishment in ethics. ... They enter and
remain in the first absorption ... This pertains to their accomplishment
in mind. ... They enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. This pertains to their accomplishment
in mind. This, Kassapa, is that accomplishment in mind.

When their mind is immersed like this, they project it and extend it
toward knowledge and vision ... This pertains to their accomplishment in
wisdom. ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.' This pertains to their accomplishment in wisdom. This, Kassapa,
is that accomplishment in wisdom.

And, Kassapa, there is no accomplishment in ethics, mind, and wisdom
that is better or finer than this.

<!--pg-->
## 6. The Lion's Roar

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach ethics. They
praise ethical conduct in many ways. But as far as the highest noble
ethics goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior.
Rather, I am the one who is superior when it comes to the higher
ethics.[^499]

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach mortification
in disgust of sin.[^500] They praise fervent mortification in disgust of
sin in many ways. But as far as the highest noble fervent mortification
in disgust of sin goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my
superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it comes to the
higher disgust of sin.[^501]

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach wisdom. They
praise wisdom in many ways. But as far as the highest noble wisdom goes,
I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior. Rather, I am
the one who is superior when it comes to the higher wisdom.

There are, Kassapa, some ascetics and brahmins who teach freedom. They
praise freedom in many ways. But as far as the highest noble freedom
goes, I don't see anyone who's my equal, still less my superior. Rather,
I am the one who is superior when it comes to the higher freedom.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama only roars his lion's roar in an empty hut, not in an
assembly.'[^502] They should be told, 'Not so!' What should be said is
this: 'The ascetic Gotama roars his lion's roar, and he roars it in the
assemblies.'

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar, and he roars it in the assemblies. But he
doesn't roar it boldly.' They should be told, 'Not so!' What should be
said is this: 'The ascetic Gotama roars his lion's roar, he roars it in
the assemblies, and he roars it boldly.'

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar, he roars it in the assemblies, and he
roars it boldly. But they don't question him. ... Or he doesn't answer
their questions. ... Or his answers are not satisfactory. ... Or they
don't think him worth listening to. ... Or they're not confident after
listening. ... Or they don't show their confidence. ... Or they don't
practice accordingly. ... Or they don't succeed in their practice.' They
should be told, 'Not so!' What should be said is this: 'The ascetic
Gotama roars his lion's roar; he roars it in the assemblies; he roars it
boldly; they question him; he answers their questions; his answers are
satisfactory; they think him worth listening to; they're confident after
listening; they show their confidence; they practice accordingly; and
they succeed in their practice.'

<!--pg-->
## 7. The Probation For One Previously Ordained

Kassapa, this one time I was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. There a certain fervent celibate named Nigrodha
asked me about the higher disgust of sin.[^503] I answered his question.
He was extremely happy with my answer."

"Sir, who wouldn't be extremely happy after hearing the Buddha's
teaching? For I too am extremely happy after hearing the Buddha's
teaching! Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the
overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the
lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see
what's there, so too the Buddha has made the teaching clear in many
ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the
mendicant Saṅgha. Sir, may I receive the going forth, the
ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

"Kassapa, if someone formerly ordained in another sect wishes to take
the going forth, the ordination in this teaching and training, they must
spend four months on probation. When four months have passed, if the
mendicants are satisfied, they'll give the going forth, the ordination
into monkhood.[^504] However, I have recognized individual differences
in this matter."[^505]

"Sir, if four months probation are required in such a case, I'll spend
four years on probation. When four years have passed, if the mendicants
are satisfied, let them give me the going forth, the ordination into
monkhood."

And the naked ascetic Kassapa received the going forth, the ordination
in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable
Kassapa, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, soon
realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He
lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Kassapa became one of the perfected.

