# DN 22 The Longer Discourse on Mindfulness Meditation

_**Mahāsatipaṭṭhānasutta**_

So I have heard.[^844] At one time the Buddha was staying
in the land of the Kurus, near the Kuru town named
Kammāsadamma. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to
convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past
sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the
system, and to realize extinguishment.[^845]

What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world.[^846] They meditate observing an aspect of feelings---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^847] They meditate observing an aspect of the mind---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^848] They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the
world.[^849]

<!--pg-->
## 1. Observing the Body

### 1.1. Mindfulness of Breathing

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the body?

It's when a mendicant---gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree,
or to an empty hut---sits down cross-legged, sets their body straight,
and establishes mindfulness in their presence.[^850] Just mindful, they
breathe in. Mindful, they breathe out.[^851]

Breathing in heavily they know: 'I'm breathing in heavily.' Breathing
out heavily they know: 'I'm breathing out heavily.'[^852]

When breathing in lightly they know: 'I'm breathing in lightly.'
Breathing out lightly they know: 'I'm breathing out lightly.'[^853]

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in experiencing the whole body.'
They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out experiencing the whole
body.'[^854]

They practice like this: 'I'll breathe in stilling the physical
process.' They practice like this: 'I'll breathe out stilling the
physical process.'[^855]

It's like a deft carpenter or carpenter's apprentice. When making a deep
cut they know: 'I'm making a deep cut,' and when making a shallow cut
they know: 'I'm making a shallow cut.'[^856]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally.[^857] They meditate
observing the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish.[^858] Or mindfulness is established
that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and
mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the
world.[^859]

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body.

<!--pg-->
### 1.2. The Postures

Furthermore, when a mendicant is walking they know: 'I am walking.' When
standing they know: 'I am standing.' When sitting they know: 'I am
sitting.' And when lying down they know: 'I am lying down.'[^860]
Whatever posture their body is in, they know it.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the body
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

### 1.3. Situational Awareness

Furthermore, a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out
and coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and
extending the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl, and robes; when
eating, drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating;
when walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent.[^861]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

<!--pg-->
### 1.4. Focusing on the Repulsive

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, up from the soles of
the feet and down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full
of many kinds of filth.[^862] 'In this body there is head hair, body
hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys,
heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery,
undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears,
grease, saliva, snot, synovial fluid, urine.'[^863]

It's as if there were a bag with openings at both ends, filled with
various kinds of grains, such as fine rice, wheat, mung beans, peas,
sesame, and ordinary rice. And someone with clear eyes were to open it
and examine the contents: 'These grains are fine rice, these are wheat,
these are mung beans, these are peas, these are sesame, and these are
ordinary rice.'[^864]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

### 1.5. Focusing on the Elements

Furthermore, a mendicant examines their own body, whatever its placement
or posture, according to the elements:[^865] 'In this body there is the
earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air
element.'[^866]

It's as if a deft butcher or butcher's apprentice were to kill a cow and
sit down at the crossroads with the meat cut into chops.[^867]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

### 1.6. The Charnel Ground Contemplations

Furthermore, suppose a mendicant were to see a corpse discarded in a
charnel ground. And it had been dead for one, two, or three days,
bloated, livid, and festering.[^868] They'd compare it with their own
body:[^869] 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and
cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an aspect of the
body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, herons, dogs, tigers,
leopards, jackals, and many kinds of little creatures. They'd compare it
with their own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same
kind, and cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an
aspect of the body internally ...

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

Furthermore, suppose they were to see a corpse discarded in a charnel
ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

A skeleton without flesh but smeared with blood, and held together by
sinews ...

A skeleton rid of flesh and blood, held together by sinews ...

Bones rid of sinews, scattered in every direction. Here a hand-bone,
there a foot-bone, here an ankle bone, there a shin-bone, here a
thigh-bone, there a hip-bone, here a rib-bone, there a back-bone, here
an arm-bone, there a neck-bone, here a jaw-bone, there a tooth, here the
skull. ...

White bones, the color of shells ...

Decrepit bones, heaped in a pile ...

Bones rotted and crumbled to powder.[^870] They'd compare it with their
own body: 'This body is also of that same nature, that same kind, and
cannot go beyond that.' And so they meditate observing an aspect of the
body internally, externally, and both internally and externally. They
meditate observing the body as liable to originate, as liable to vanish,
and as liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is
established that the body exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge
and mindfulness. They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in
the world.

That too is how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body.

## 2. Observing the Feelings

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of feelings?[^871]

It's when a mendicant who feels a pleasant feeling knows: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling.'[^872]

When they feel a painful feeling, they know: 'I feel a painful feeling.'

When they feel a neutral feeling, they know: 'I feel a neutral feeling.'

When they feel a pleasant feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling of the flesh.'[^873]

When they feel a pleasant feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
pleasant feeling not of the flesh.'[^874]

When they feel a painful feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a painful feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
painful feeling not of the flesh.'[^875]

When they feel a neutral feeling of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling of the flesh.'

When they feel a neutral feeling not of the flesh, they know: 'I feel a
neutral feeling not of the flesh.'[^876]

And so they meditate observing an aspect of feelings internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
feelings as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that feelings
exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings.

<!--pg-->
## 3. Observing the Mind

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of the mind?

It's when a mendicant understands mind with greed as 'mind with
greed,'[^877] and mind without greed as 'mind without greed.' They
understand mind with hate as 'mind with hate,' and mind without hate as
'mind without hate.' They understand mind with delusion as 'mind with
delusion,' and mind without delusion as 'mind without delusion.' They
know constricted mind as 'constricted mind,'[^878] and scattered mind as
'scattered mind.' They know expansive mind as 'expansive mind,'[^879]
and unexpansive mind as 'unexpansive mind.' They know mind that is not
supreme as 'mind that is not supreme,' and mind that is supreme as 'mind
that is supreme.' They know mind immersed in samādhi as
'mind immersed in samādhi,' and mind not immersed in
samādhi as 'mind not immersed in samādhi.'
They know freed mind as 'freed mind,' and unfreed mind as 'unfreed
mind.'

<!--pg-->
And so they meditate observing an aspect of the mind internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the mind as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as liable to
both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that the mind
exists, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness. They
meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the mind.

<!--pg-->
## 4. Observing Principles

### 4.1. The Hindrances

And how does a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles?

It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.[^880] And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
hindrances?

It's when a mendicant who has sensual desire in them understands: 'I
have sensual desire in me.' When they don't have sensual desire in them,
they understand: 'I don't have sensual desire in me.' They understand
how sensual desire arises; how, when it's already arisen, it's given up;
and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in the future.[^881]

When they have ill will in them, they understand: 'I have ill will in
me.' When they don't have ill will in them, they understand: 'I don't
have ill will in me.' They understand how ill will arises; how, when
it's already arisen, it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it
doesn't arise again in the future.

When they have dullness and drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I have
dullness and drowsiness in me.' When they don't have dullness and
drowsiness in them, they understand: 'I don't have dullness and
drowsiness in me.' They understand how dullness and drowsiness arise;
how, when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once
they're given up, they don't arise again in the future.[^882]

When they have restlessness and remorse in them, they understand: 'I
have restlessness and remorse in me.' When they don't have restlessness
and remorse in them, they understand: 'I don't have restlessness and
remorse in me.' They understand how restlessness and remorse arise; how,
when they've already arisen, they're given up; and how, once they're
given up, they don't arise again in the future.

When they have doubt in them, they understand: 'I have doubt in me.'
When they don't have doubt in them, they understand: 'I don't have doubt
in me.' They understand how doubt arises; how, when it's already arisen,
it's given up; and how, once it's given up, it doesn't arise again in
the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five hindrances.

### 4.2. The Aggregates

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates. And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the five
grasping aggregates?

It's when a mendicant contemplates: Such is form, such is the origin of
form, such is the ending of form.[^883] Such is feeling, such is the
origin of feeling, such is the ending of feeling. Such is perception,
such is the origin of perception, such is the ending of
perception.[^884] Such are choices, such is the origin of choices, such
is the ending of choices.[^885] Such is consciousness, such is the
origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' And so
they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the five grasping aggregates.

### 4.3. The Sense Fields

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six interior and exterior sense fields. And how does
a mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to
the six interior and exterior sense fields?

It's when a mendicant understands the eye, sights, and the fetter that
arises dependent on both of these. They understand how the fetter that
has not arisen comes to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be
abandoned; and how the abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the
future.[^886]

They understand the ear, sounds, and the fetter ...

They understand the nose, smells, and the fetter ...

They understand the tongue, tastes, and the fetter ...

They understand the body, touches, and the fetter ...

They understand the mind, ideas, and the fetter that arises dependent on
both of these. They understand how the fetter that has not arisen comes
to arise; how the arisen fetter comes to be abandoned; and how the
abandoned fetter comes to not rise again in the future.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally ...

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the six internal and external sense fields.

### 4.4. The Awakening Factors

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.[^887] And how does a
mendicant meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the
seven awakening factors?

It's when a mendicant who has the awakening factor of mindfulness in
them understands: 'I have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
When they don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in them, they
understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor of mindfulness in me.'
They understand how the awakening factor of mindfulness that has not
arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening factor of mindfulness that
has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.[^888]

When they have the awakening factor of investigation of principles
...[^889] energy ... rapture ... tranquility ... immersion ...
equanimity in them, they understand: 'I have the awakening factor of
equanimity in me.' When they don't have the awakening factor of
equanimity in them, they understand: 'I don't have the awakening factor
of equanimity in me.' They understand how the awakening factor of
equanimity that has not arisen comes to arise; and how the awakening
factor of equanimity that has arisen becomes fulfilled by development.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the seven awakening factors.

### 4.5. The Truths

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.[^890] And how does a mendicant
meditate observing an aspect of principles with respect to the four
noble truths?

It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering.'

_*The first recitation section is finished.*_

<!--pg-->
#### 4.5.1. The Truth of Suffering

And what is the noble truth of suffering?[^891]

Rebirth is suffering; old age is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are suffering; association with
the disliked is suffering; separation from the liked is suffering; not
getting what you wish for is suffering. In brief, the five grasping
aggregates are suffering.

And what is rebirth? The rebirth, inception, conception, reincarnation,
manifestation of the sets of phenomena, and acquisition of the sense
fields of the various sentient beings in the various orders of sentient
beings.[^892] This is called rebirth.

And what is old age? The old age, decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair,
wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
old age.

And what is death? The passing away, passing on, disintegration, demise,
mortality, death, decease, breaking up of the aggregates, laying to rest
of the corpse, and cutting off of the life faculty of the various
sentient beings in the various orders of sentient beings. This is called
death.

And what is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing, state of sorrow, inner
sorrow, inner deep sorrow in someone who has undergone misfortune, who
has experienced suffering.[^893] This is called sorrow.

And what is lamentation? The wail, lament, wailing, lamenting, state of
wailing and lamentation in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has
experienced suffering. This is called lamentation.

And what is pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact.[^894] This is
called pain.

And what is sadness?[^895] Mental pain, mental displeasure, the painful,
unpleasant feeling that's born from mental contact. This is called
sadness.

And what is distress? The stress, distress, state of stress and distress
in someone who has undergone misfortune, who has experienced suffering.
This is called distress.

And what is meant by 'association with the disliked is suffering'? There
are sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are
unlikable, undesirable, and disagreeable. And there are those who want
to harm, injure, disturb, and threaten you. The coming together with
these, the joining, inclusion, mixing with them: this is what is meant
by 'association with the disliked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'separation from the liked is suffering'? There are
sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, which are likable,
desirable, and agreeable. And there are those who want to benefit, help,
comfort, and protect you: mother and father, brother and sister, friends
and colleagues, relatives and kin. The division from these, the
disconnection, segregation, and parting from them:[^896] this is what is
meant by 'separation from the liked is suffering'.

And what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering'? In
sentient beings who are liable to be reborn, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if
only we were not liable to be reborn! If only rebirth would not come to
us!'[^897] But you can't get that by wishing. This is what is meant by
'not getting what you wish for is suffering.' In sentient beings who are
liable to grow old ... fall ill ... die ... experience sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, such a wish arises: 'Oh, if
only we were not liable to experience sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress! If only sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress would not come to us!' But you can't get that by wishing. This
is what is meant by 'not getting what you wish for is suffering.'

And what is meant by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are
suffering'? They are the grasping aggregates that consist of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is what is meant
by 'in brief, the five grasping aggregates are suffering'.

This is called the noble truth of suffering.

#### 4.5.2. The Origin of Suffering

And what is the noble truth of the origin of suffering?

It's the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and
greed, taking pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual
pleasures, craving for continued existence, and craving to end
existence.

But where does that craving arise and where does it settle? Whatever in
the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving arises and
settles.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.[^898] The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind in the
world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas in the
world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Eye consciousness ...[^899] ear consciousness ... nose consciousness ...
tongue consciousness ... body consciousness ... mind consciousness in
the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises
and settles.

Eye contact ...[^900] ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact
... body contact ... mind contact in the world seems nice and pleasant,
and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Feeling born of eye contact ... feeling born of ear contact ... feeling
born of nose contact ... feeling born of tongue contact ... feeling born
of body contact ... feeling born of mind contact in the world seems nice
and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Perception of sights ...[^901] perception of sounds ... perception of
smells ... perception of tastes ... perception of touches ... perception
of ideas in the world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Intention regarding sights ...[^902] intention regarding sounds ...
intention regarding smells ... intention regarding tastes ... intention
regarding touches ... intention regarding ideas in the world seems nice
and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and settles.

Craving for sights ... craving for sounds ... craving for smells ...
craving for tastes ... craving for touches ... craving for ideas in the
world seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving arises and
settles.

Thoughts about sights ...[^903] thoughts about sounds ... thoughts about
smells ... thoughts about tastes ... thoughts about touches ... thoughts
about ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that
craving arises and settles.

Considerations regarding sights ...[^904] considerations regarding
sounds ... considerations regarding smells ... considerations regarding
tastes ... considerations regarding touches ... considerations regarding
ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving
arises and settles.

This is called the noble truth of the origin of suffering.

#### 4.5.3. The Cessation of Suffering

And what is the noble truth of the cessation of suffering?

It's the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with
nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not
clinging to it.

Whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant, it is there that craving
is given up and ceases.

And what in the world seems nice and pleasant? The eye in the world
seems nice and pleasant, and it is there that craving is given up and
ceases. ...

Considerations regarding ideas in the world seem nice and pleasant, and
it is there that craving is given up and ceases.

This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.

#### 4.5.4. The Path

And what is the noble truth of the practice that leads to the cessation
of suffering?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion.[^905]

And what is right view? Knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.[^906] This is called right view.

And what is right thought? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness.[^907] This is called right thought.

And what is right speech? The refraining from lying, divisive speech,
harsh speech, and talking nonsense. This is called right speech.

And what is right action? Refraining from killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct.[^908] This is called right action.

And what is right livelihood? It's when a noble disciple gives up wrong
livelihood and earns a living by right livelihood.[^909] This is called
right livelihood.

And what is right effort? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
right effort.

And what is right mindfulness? It's when a mendicant meditates by
observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of the
mind---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of principles---keen,
aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.
This is called right mindfulness.

And what is right immersion? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the
placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and
remain in the second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of
immersion, with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the
mind and keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they
enter and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with
equanimity, mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of
which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in
bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is called
right immersion.

This is called the noble truth of the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering.

And so they meditate observing an aspect of principles internally,
externally, and both internally and externally. They meditate observing
the principles as liable to originate, as liable to vanish, and as
liable to both originate and vanish. Or mindfulness is established that
principles exist, to the extent necessary for knowledge and mindfulness.
They meditate independent, not grasping at anything in the world.

That's how a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of principles
with respect to the four noble truths.

Anyone who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this
way for seven years can expect one of two results:[^910] enlightenment
in this very life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

Let alone seven years,[^911] anyone who develops these four kinds of
mindfulness meditation in this way for six years ... five years ... four
years ... three years ... two years ... one year ... seven months ...
six months ... five months ... four months ... three months ... two
months ... one month ... a fortnight ... Let alone a fortnight, anyone
who develops these four kinds of mindfulness meditation in this way for
seven days can expect one of two results: enlightenment in this very
life, or if there's something left over, non-return.

'The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence.
They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and
crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and
to realize extinguishment.' That's what I said, and this is why I said
it."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

