# 26. The Wheel-Turning Monarch
_**Cakkavattisutta**_

## 1. Taking Refuge in Oneself

So I have heard.  At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Magadhans at Mātulā.[^46] There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge.[^47] And how does a mendicant do this? They meditate observing
an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of
feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's how a mendicant lives
as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That's how
they let the teaching be their island and their refuge, with no other
refuge.

You should roam inside your own territory, the domain of your
fathers.[^48] If you roam inside your own territory, the domain of your
fathers, Māra won't catch you or get hold of you. It is due
to undertaking skillful qualities that merit grows.[^49]

## 2. King Daḷhanemi

Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a king named
Daḷhanemi who was a wheel-turning monarch, a just and
principled king. His dominion extended to all four sides, he achieved
stability in the country, and he possessed the seven treasures.[^50] He
had the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the horse,
the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the seventh
treasure. He had over a thousand sons who were valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigned by principle, without rod or sword.

Then, after many years, many hundred years, many thousand years had
passed, King Daḷhanemi addressed one of his men, 'My good
man, when you see that the heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from
its place, please tell me.'[^51]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

After many thousand years had passed, that man saw that the heavenly
wheel-treasure had receded back from its place. So he went to King
Daḷhanemi and said, 'Please sire, you should know that your
heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place.'

So the king summoned the crown prince and said, 'Dear prince, my
heavenly wheel-treasure has receded back from its place. I've heard that
when this happens to a wheel-turning monarch, he does not have long to
live. I have enjoyed human pleasures. Now it is time for me to seek
heavenly pleasures.[^52] Come, dear prince, rule this land surrounded by
ocean! I shall shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness.'

And so, after carefully instructing the crown prince in kingship, King
Daḷhanemi shaved off his hair and beard, dressed in ocher
robes, and went forth from the lay life to homelessness.[^53] Seven days
later the heavenly wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. He
went to the royal sage and said, 'Please sire, you should know that the
heavenly wheel-treasure has vanished.'

When he said this, the royal sage said to him, 'Don't be unhappy at the
vanishing of the wheel-treasure. My dear, the wheel-treasure is not
inherited from your father.[^54] Come now, my dear, proceed in the noble
duty of a wheel-turning monarch.[^55] If you do so, it's possible
that---on a fifteenth day sabbath, having bathed your head and gone
upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the sabbath---the heavenly
wheel-treasure will appear to you, with a thousand spokes, with rim and
hub, complete in every detail.'

### 2.1. The Noble Duty of a Wheel-Turning Monarch

'But sire, what is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch?'

'Well then, my dear, relying only on principle---honoring, respecting,
and venerating principle, having principle as your flag, banner, and
authority---provide just protection and security for your court, troops,
aristocrats, vassals, brahmins and householders, people of town and
country, ascetics and brahmins, beasts and birds.[^56] Do not let
injustice prevail in the realm.[^57] Provide money to the penniless in
the realm.[^58]

And there are ascetics and brahmins in the realm who refrain from
intoxication and negligence, are settled in patience and sweetness, and
who tame, calm, and extinguish themselves. From time to time you should
go up to them and ask and learn:[^59] "Sirs, what is skillful? What is
unskillful? What is blameworthy? What is blameless? What should be
cultivated? What should not be cultivated? Doing what leads to my
lasting harm and suffering? Doing what leads to my lasting welfare and
happiness?" Having heard them, you should reject what is unskillful and
undertake and follow what is skillful.

This is the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.'

### 2.2. The Wheel-Treasure Appears

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied the new king to the royal sage. And he
proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch.

While he was proceeding in that duty, on a fifteenth day sabbath, he had
bathed his head and gone upstairs in the royal longhouse to observe the
sabbath. And the heavenly wheel-treasure appeared to him, with a
thousand spokes, with rim and hub, complete in every detail. Seeing
this, the king thought, 'I have heard that when the heavenly
wheel-treasure appears to a king in this way, he becomes a wheel-turning
monarch. Am I then a wheel-turning monarch?'

Then the anointed king, rising from his seat and arranging his robe over
one shoulder, took a ceremonial vase in his left hand and besprinkled
the wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying, 'Roll forth, O
wheel-treasure! Triumph, O wheel-treasure!'

Then the wheel-treasure rolled towards the east. And the king followed
it together with his army of four divisions. In whatever place the
wheel-treasure stood still, there the king came to stay together with
his army. And any opposing rulers of the eastern quarter came to the
wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come, great king! Welcome, great king!
We are yours, great king, instruct us.' The wheel-turning monarch said,
'Do not kill living creatures. Do not steal. Do not commit sexual
misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor. Maintain the current level
of taxation.' And so the opposing rulers of the eastern quarter became
his vassals.

Then the wheel-treasure, having plunged into the eastern ocean and
emerged again, rolled towards the south. ... Having plunged into the
southern ocean and emerged again, it rolled towards the west. ...

Having plunged into the western ocean and emerged again, it rolled
towards the north, followed by the king together with his army of four
divisions. In whatever place the wheel-treasure stood still, there the
king came to stay together with his army. And any opposing rulers of the
northern quarter came to the wheel-turning monarch and said, 'Come,
great king! Welcome, great king! We are yours, great king, instruct us.'
The wheel-turning monarch said, 'Do not kill living creatures. Do not
steal. Do not commit sexual misconduct. Do not lie. Do not drink liquor.
Maintain the current level of taxation.' And so the rulers of the
northern quarter became his vassals.

And then the wheel-treasure, having triumphed over this land surrounded
by ocean, returned to the royal capital. There it stood still by the
gate to the royal compound at the High Court as if fixed to an axle,
illuminating the royal compound.

## 3. On Subsequent Wheel-Turning Monarchs

And for a second time, and a third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and a
seventh time, a wheel-turning monarch was established in exactly the
same way. And after many years the seventh wheel-turning monarch went
forth, handing the realm over to the crown prince.

Seven days later the heavenly wheel-treasure vanished.

Then a certain man approached the newly anointed aristocrat king and
said, 'Please sire, you should know that the heavenly wheel-treasure has
vanished.' At that the king was unhappy and experienced unhappiness. But
he didn't go to the royal sage and ask about the noble duty of a
wheel-turning monarch. He just governed the country according to his own
ideas.[^60] So governed, the country's people did not prosper like
before, as they had when former kings proceeded in the noble duty of a
wheel-turning monarch.[^61]

Then the ministers and councillors, the finance ministers, military
officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers gathered and said to the
king,[^62] 'Sire, when governed according to your own ideas, the
country's people do not prosper like before, as they did when former
kings proceeded in the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. In your
realm are found ministers and councillors, finance ministers, military
officers, guardsmen, and professional advisers---both ourselves and
others---who remember the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. Please,
Your Majesty, ask us about the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. We
will answer you.'

## 4. On the Period of Decline

So the anointed king asked the assembled ministers and councillors,
finance ministers, military officers, guardsmen, and professional
advisers about the noble duty of a wheel-turning monarch. And they
answered him. After listening to them, he provided just protection and
security. But he did not provide money to the penniless in the
realm.[^63] And so poverty grew widespread.

When poverty was widespread, a certain person stole from others, with
the intention to commit theft.[^64] They arrested him and presented him
to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others with
the intention to commit theft.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others with the intention to commit theft?'[^65]

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven.'[^66]

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

But then another man stole something from others. They arrested him and
presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from
others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

So the king provided some money to that person, saying, 'With this
money, mister, keep yourself alive, and provide for your mother and
father, partners and children. Work for a living, and establish an
uplifting religious donation for ascetics and brahmins that's conducive
to heaven, ripens in happiness, and leads to heaven.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' replied that man.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is providing money to anyone
who steals from others!'[^67] It occurred to them, 'Why don't we steal
from others?' So then another man stole something from others.

They arrested him and presented him to the king, saying, 'Your Majesty,
this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'It's true, sire.'

'What was the reason?'

'Sire, I can't survive.'

Then the king thought, 'If I provide money to anyone who steals from
others, it will only increase the stealing. I'd better make an end of
this person, finish him off, and chop off his head.'[^68]

Then he ordered his men, 'Well then, my men, tie this man's arms tightly
behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head and march him from
street to street and square to square to the beating of a harsh drum.
Then take him out the south gate and make an end of him, finish him off,
and chop off his head.'

'Yes, Your Majesty,' they replied, and did as he commanded.

People heard about this: 'It seems the king is chopping the head off
anyone who steals from others!' It occurred to them, 'We'd better have
sharp swords made. Then when we steal from others, we'll make an end of
them, finish them off, and chop off their heads.'[^69] They had sharp
swords made. Then they started to make raids on villages, towns, and
cities, and to infest the highways. And they chopped the heads off
anyone they stole from.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty
became widespread. When poverty was widespread, theft became widespread.
When theft was widespread, swords became widespread. When swords were
widespread, killing living creatures became widespread. And for the
sentient beings among whom killing was widespread, their lifespan and
beauty declined. Those people lived for 80,000 years, but their children
lived for 40,000 years.[^70]

Among the people who lived for 40,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. They arrested him and presented him to the king,
saying, 'Your Majesty, this person stole from others.'

The king said to that person, 'Is it really true, mister, that you stole
from others?'

'No, sire,' he said, deliberately lying.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, and killing became widespread. When killing was
widespread, lying became widespread. And for the sentient beings among
whom lying was widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those
people who lived for 40,000 years had children who lived for 20,000
years.

Among the people who lived for 20,000 years, a certain person stole
something from others. Someone else reported this to the king, 'Your
Majesty, such-and-such person stole from others,' he said, going behind
his back.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, and lying became widespread. When lying was
widespread, backbiting became widespread. And for the sentient beings
among whom backbiting was widespread, their lifespan and beauty
declined. Those people who lived for 20,000 years had children who lived
for 10,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 10,000 years, some were beautiful, some
were ugly. And the ugly beings, coveting the beautiful ones, committed
adultery with the wives of others.[^71]

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, poverty,
theft, swords, killing, lying, and backbiting became widespread. When
backbiting was widespread, sexual misconduct became widespread. And for
the sentient beings among whom sexual misconduct was widespread, their
lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived for 10,000 years
had children who lived for 5,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 5,000 years, two things became
widespread: harsh speech and talking nonsense.[^72] For the sentient
beings among whom these two things were widespread, their lifespan and
beauty declined. Those people who lived for 5,000 years had some
children who lived for 2,500 years, while others lived for 2,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 2,500 years, desire and ill will became
widespread. For the sentient beings among whom desire and ill will were
widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived
for 2,500 years had children who lived for 1,000 years.

Among the people who lived for 1,000 years, wrong view became
widespread.[^73] For the sentient beings among whom wrong view was
widespread, their lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived
for 1,000 years had children who lived for five hundred years.

Among the people who lived for five hundred years, three things became
widespread: illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong custom.[^74] For
the sentient beings among whom these three things were widespread, their
lifespan and beauty declined. Those people who lived for five hundred
years had some children who lived for two hundred and fifty years, while
others lived for two hundred years.

Among the people who lived for two hundred and fifty years, these things
became widespread: lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics
and brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family.

And so, mendicants, from not providing money to the penniless, all these
things became widespread---poverty, theft, swords, killing, lying,
backbiting, sexual misconduct, harsh speech and talking nonsense, desire
and ill will, wrong view, illicit desire, immoral greed, and wrong
custom, and lack of due respect for mother and father, ascetics and
brahmins, and failure to honor the elders in the family. For the
sentient beings among whom these things were widespread, their lifespan
and beauty declined. Those people who lived for two hundred and fifty
years had children who lived for a hundred years.[^75]

## 5. When People Live for Ten Years

There will come a time, mendicants, when these people will have children
who live for ten years.[^76] Among the people who live for ten years,
girls will be marriageable at five.[^77] The following flavors will
disappear: ghee, butter, oil, honey, molasses, and salt. The best kind
of food will be finger millet,[^78] just as fine rice with meat is the
best kind of food today.[^79]

The ten ways of doing skillful deeds will totally disappear, and the ten
ways of doing unskillful deeds will explode in popularity.[^80] Those
people will not even have the word 'skillful', still less anyone who
does what is skillful.[^81] And anyone who disrespects mother and
father, ascetics and brahmins, and fails to honor the elders in the
family will be venerated and praised, just as the opposite is venerated
and praised today.

There'll be no recognition of the status of mother, aunts, or wives and
partners of tutors and respected people.[^82] The world will become
dissolute, like goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, and dogs and
jackals.[^83]

They'll be full of hostility towards each other, with acute ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of murder. Even a mother will feel like this
for her child, and the child for its mother, father for child, child for
father, brother for sister, and sister for brother. They'll be just like
a deer hunter when he sees a deer---full of hostility, ill will,
malevolence, and thoughts of killing.

Among the people who live for ten years, there will be an interregnum of
swords lasting seven days.[^84] During that time they will see each
other as beasts.[^85] Sharp swords will appear in their hands, with
which they'll take each other's life, crying, 'It's a beast! It's a
beast!'

But then some of those beings will think, 'Let us neither kill nor be
killed! Why don't we hide in thick grass, thick jungle, thick trees,
inaccessible riverlands, or rugged mountains and survive on forest roots
and fruits?'[^86] So that's what they do.

When those seven days have passed, having emerged from their hiding
places and embraced each other, they will come together and cry in one
voice,[^87] 'Fantastic, dear foe, you live! Fantastic, dear foe, you
live!'[^88]

## 6. The Period of Growth

Then those beings will think, 'It's because we undertook unskillful
things that we suffered such an extensive loss of our relatives. We'd
better do what's skillful. What skillful thing should we do? Why don't
we refrain from killing living creatures? Having undertaken this
skillful thing we'll live by it.'[^89] So that's what they do. Because
of undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty will grow.
Those people who live for ten years will have children who live for
twenty years.

Then those beings will think, 'Because of undertaking this skillful
thing, our lifespan and beauty are growing. Why don't we do even more
skillful things? What skillful thing should we do? Why don't we refrain
from stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying ... backbiting ... harsh
speech ... and talking nonsense. Why don't we give up covetousness ...
ill will ... wrong view ... three things: illicit desire, immoral greed,
and wrong custom. Why don't we pay due respect to mother and father,
ascetics and brahmins, honoring the elders in our families? Having
undertaken this skillful thing we'll live by it.' So that's what they
do.

Because of undertaking this skillful thing, their lifespan and beauty
will grow. Those people who live for twenty years will have children who
live for forty years. Those people who live for forty years will have
children who live for eighty years, then a hundred and sixty years,
three hundred and twenty years, six hundred and forty years, 2,000
years, 4,000 years, 8,000 years, 20,000 years, 40,000 years, and finally
80,000 years. Among the people who live for 80,000 years, girls will be
marriageable at five hundred.

## 7. The Time of King Saṅkha

Among the people who live for 80,000 years, there will be just three
afflictions: greed, starvation, and old age.[^90] The Black Plum Tree
Land will be successful and prosperous. The villages, towns, and capital
cities will be no more than a chicken's flight apart. And the land will
be so full of people you'd think they were squashed together, like a
thicket of rushes or reeds. The royal capital will be Varanasi, renamed
Ketumatī. And it will be successful, prosperous, populous,
full of people, with plenty of food.[^91] There will be 84,000 cities in
the Black Plum Tree Land, with the royal capital of
Ketumatī foremost.

And in the royal capital of Ketumatī a king named
Saṅkha will arise, a wheel-turning monarch, a just and
principled king. His dominion will extend to all four sides, he will
achieve stability in the country, and possess the seven treasures.[^92]
He will have the following seven treasures: the wheel, the elephant, the
horse, the jewel, the woman, the householder, and the commander as the
seventh treasure. He will have over a thousand sons who are valiant and
heroic, crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land
girt by sea, he will reign by principle, without rod or sword.

## 8. The Arising of the Buddha Metteyya

And the Blessed One named Metteyya will arise in the world---perfected,
a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed---[^93] just as I have arisen
today.[^94] He will realize with his own insight this world---with its
gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and make it known to others,
just as I do today. He will teach the Dhamma that's good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he will reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely
full and pure, just as I do today. He will lead a Saṅgha of
many thousand mendicants, just as I lead a Saṅgha of many
hundreds today.[^95]

Then King Saṅkha will have the sacrificial post once built
by King Mahāpanāda raised up.[^96] Having reigned, he will
abdicate, offering charity to ascetics and brahmins, paupers, vagrants,
supplicants, and beggars. Then, having shaved off his hair and beard and
dressed in ocher robes, he will go forth from the lay life to
homelessness in the Buddha Metteyya's presence.[^97] Soon after going
forth, living withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute, he will realize
the supreme end of the spiritual path in this very life. He will live
having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen
rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Mendicants, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other
refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other
refuge. And how does a mendicant do this? It's when a mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate
observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. That's
how a mendicant lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no
other refuge. That's how they let the teaching be their island and their
refuge, with no other refuge.

## 9. On Long Life and Beauty for Mendicants

Mendicants, you should roam inside your own territory, the domain of
your fathers. Doing so, you will grow in lifespan, beauty, happiness,
wealth, and power.

And what is long life for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. Having developed and cultivated these
four bases of psychic power they may, if they wish, live for the proper
lifespan or what's left of it. This is long life for a mendicant.

And what is beauty for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant is ethical,
restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is beauty for a
mendicant.

And what is happiness for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. This is happiness for a mendicant.

And what is wealth for a mendicant? It's when a monk meditates spreading
a heart full of love to one direction, and to the second, and to the
third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of love to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ...
equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to
the fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all
around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the whole
world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will.
This is wealth for a mendicant.

And what is power for a mendicant? It's when a mendicant realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is power for a mendicant.

Mendicants, I do not see a single power so hard to defeat as the power
of Māra. It is due to undertaking skillful qualities that
merit grows."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

