# 29. An Impressive Discourse
_**Pāsādikasutta**_

So I have heard.  At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans in a stilt longhouse in a mango grove belonging to
those Sakyans named Vedhaññā.[^190]

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had
recently passed away at Pāvā.[^191] With his passing the
Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling,
and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words:[^192]

"You don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this
teaching and training. What, you understand this teaching and training?
You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you
don't. You said last what you should have said first. You said first
what you should have said last. What you've thought so much about has
been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine!
You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics.[^193] And the Jain Ñātika's white-clothed lay
disciples were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain
ascetics. They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with
broken monument and without a refuge.[^194]

And then, after completing the rainy season residence near
Pāvā, the novice Cunda went to see Venerable Ānanda at
Sāma village. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told him
what had happened.[^195]

Ānanda said to him, "Reverend Cunda, we should see the Buddha about this
matter. Come, let's go to the Buddha and tell him about this."

"Yes, sir," replied Cunda.

Then Ānanda and Cunda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and told him what had happened.

## 1. The Teaching of the Unawakened

"That's what happens, Cunda, when a teaching and training is poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.[^196]

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching does not practice in line with the teachings,
does not practice following that procedure, does not live in line with
the teaching. They proceed having turned away from that teaching.[^197]
You should say this to them, 'You're fortunate, reverend, you're so very
fortunate! For your teacher is not awakened, and their teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. But you
don't practice in line with that teaching, you don't practice following
that procedure, you don't live in line with the teaching. You proceed
having turned away from that teaching.' In such a case the teacher and
the teaching are to blame, but the disciple deserves praise.[^198]
Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Come on, venerable,
practice as taught and pointed out by your teacher.' The one who
encourages, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much wickedness.[^199] Why is that? It's because
that teaching and training is poorly explained and poorly propounded,
not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not
a fully awakened Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is not awakened, and the teaching is
poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to
peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. A
disciple in that teaching practices in line with the teachings,
practices following that procedure, lives in line with the teaching.
They proceed having undertaken that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is not awakened, and their teaching is poorly explained and poorly
propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha. And you practice in line
with that teaching, you practice following that procedure, you live in
line with the teaching. You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In
such a case the teacher, the teaching, and the disciple are all to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the
venerable is practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.'
The one who praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being
praised, rouses up even more energy all create much wickedness. Why is
that? It's because that teaching and training is poorly explained and
poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace, proclaimed by
someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha.

## 2. The Teaching of the Awakened

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching does not practice in line with the teachings, does not practice
following that procedure, does not live in line with the teaching. They
proceed having turned away from that teaching. You should say this to
them, 'It's your loss, reverend, it's your misfortune! For your teacher
is awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. But you don't practice in line with that teaching, you
don't practice following that procedure, you don't live in line with the
teaching. You proceed having turned away from that teaching.' In such a
case the teacher and the teaching deserve praise, but the disciple is to
blame. Suppose someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Come on,
venerable, practice as taught and pointed out by your teacher.' The one
who encourages, the one who they encourage, and the one who practices
accordingly all create much merit. Why is that? It's because that
teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

Take the case where a teacher is awakened, and the teaching is well
explained and well propounded, emancipating, leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is a fully awakened Buddha. A disciple in that
teaching practices in line with the teachings, practices following that
procedure, lives in line with the teaching. They proceed having
undertaken that teaching. You should say this to them, 'You're
fortunate, reverend, you're so very fortunate! For your teacher is
awakened, and their teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha. And you practice in line with that teaching, you
practice following that procedure, you live in line with the teaching.
You proceed having undertaken that teaching.' In such a case the
teacher, the teaching, and the disciple all deserve praise. Suppose
someone was to say to such a disciple, 'Clearly the venerable is
practicing systematically and will succeed in that system.' The one who
praises, the one who they praise, and the one who, being praised, rouses
up even more energy all create much merit. Why is that? It's because
that teaching and training is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is a fully
awakened Buddha.

## 3. When Disciples Have Regrets

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. But the disciples have not been educated in the meaning
of that good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure has not been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have
not all been collected; and it has not been well proclaimed with its
demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and humans.[^200] And then
their teacher passes away. When such a teacher has passed away the
disciples are tormented by regrets. Why is that? They think: 'Our
teacher was perfected, a fully awakened Buddha. His teaching was well
explained, but we were not educated in its meaning. And the spiritual
practice was not fully disclosed and revealed to us; its sayings have
not all been collected; and it has not been well proclaimed with its
demonstrable basis wherever there are gods and humans. And then our
teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has passed away the disciples
are tormented by regrets.

## 4. When Disciples Have No Regrets

Take the case where a teacher arises in the world who is perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha. The teaching is well explained and well
propounded, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is
fully awakened. The disciples have been educated in the meaning of that
good teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure
has been disclosed and revealed to them; its sayings have all been
collected; and it has been well proclaimed with its demonstrable basis
wherever there are gods and humans. And then their teacher passes away.
When such a teacher has passed away the disciples are free of regrets.
Why is that? They think: 'Our teacher was perfected, a fully awakened
Buddha. His teaching was well explained, we were educated in its
meaning, and the spiritual practice was fully disclosed to us. And then
our teacher passed away.' When such a teacher has passed away the
disciples are free of regrets.

## 5. On the Incomplete Spiritual Path, Etc.

Now suppose, Cunda, that a spiritual path possesses those factors. But
the teacher is not senior, long standing, long gone forth, advanced in
years, and reached the final stage of life. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior. But there are no senior monk disciples who are
competent, educated, assured, have attained sanctuary from the
yoke,[^201] who can rightly explain the true teaching, and who can
legitimately and completely refute the doctrines of others that come up,
and teach with a demonstrable basis. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, then that spiritual path is
complete in that respect.

Now suppose that a spiritual path possesses those factors and the
teacher is senior and there are competent senior monks. But there are no
competent middle monks, junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior
nuns, celibate white-clothed laymen, white-clothed laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate white-clothed laywomen, white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures. ... There are white-clothed
laywomen enjoying sensual pleasures, but the spiritual path is not
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans ... the spiritual path is
successful and prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well
proclaimed wherever there are gods and humans, but it has not reached
the peak of material things and fame. Then that spiritual path is
incomplete in that respect.

But when a spiritual path possesses those factors and the teacher is
senior and there are competent senior monks, middle monks, junior monks,
senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen, laymen enjoying
sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, laywomen enjoying sensual
pleasures, and the spiritual path is successful and prosperous,
extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever there are
gods and humans, and it has reached the peak of material things and
fame, then that spiritual path is complete in that respect.

I, Cunda, am a teacher who has arisen in the world today, perfected and
fully awakened. The teaching is well explained and well propounded,
emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is fully
awakened. My disciples have been educated in the meaning of that good
teaching. And the spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure has
been disclosed and revealed to them with all its collected sayings, with
its demonstrable basis, well proclaimed wherever there are gods and
humans. I am a teacher today who is senior, long standing, long gone
forth, advanced in years, and have reached the final stage of life.

I have today disciples who are competent senior monks, middle monks,
junior monks, senior nuns, middle nuns, junior nuns, celibate laymen,
laymen enjoying sensual pleasures, celibate laywomen, and laywomen
enjoying sensual pleasures. Today my spiritual path is successful and
prosperous, extensive, popular, widespread, and well proclaimed wherever
there are gods and humans.

Of all the teachers in the world today, Cunda, I don't see even a single
one who has reached the peak of material things and fame like me. Of all
the spiritual communities and groups in the world today, Cunda, I don't
see even a single one who has reached the pinnacle of material things
and fame like the mendicant Saṅgha. And if there's any
spiritual path of which it may be rightly said that it's endowed with
all good qualities, complete in all good qualities, neither too little
nor too much, well explained, whole, full, and well propounded, it's of
this spiritual path that this should be said.

Uddaka son of Rāma used to say:[^202] 'Seeing, one does not
see.' But seeing what does one not see? You can see the blade of a
well-sharpened razor, but not the edge.[^203] Thus it is said: 'Seeing,
one does not see.'[^204] But that saying of Uddaka's is low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless, as it's only about a razor. If there's
anything of which it may be rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see,'
it's of this that it should be said. Seeing what does one not see? One
sees this: a spiritual path endowed with all good qualities, complete in
all good qualities, neither too little nor too much, well explained,
whole, full, and well propounded. One does not see this: anything that,
were it to be removed, would make it purer. One does not see this:
anything that, were it to be added, would make it more complete. Thus it
is rightly said: 'Seeing, one does not see.'

## 6. Teachings Should be Recited in Concert

So, Cunda, you should all come together and recite in concert, without
disputing, those things I have taught you from my direct knowledge,
comparing meaning with meaning and phrasing with phrasing, so that this
spiritual path may last for a long time. That would be for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.[^205] And what are
those things I have taught from my direct knowledge? They are the four
kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases
of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.[^206] These are the
things I have taught from my own direct knowledge.

## 7. Reaching Agreement

Suppose one of those spiritual companions who is training in harmony and
mutual appreciation, without disputing, were to recite the teaching in
the Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable
misconstrues the meaning and mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither
approve nor dismiss them, but say,[^207] 'Reverend, if this is the
meaning, the phrasing may either be this or that: which is more fitting?
And if this is the phrasing, the meaning may be either this or that:
which is more fitting?'[^208] Suppose they reply, 'This phrasing fits
the meaning better than that. And this meaning fits the phrasing better
than that.' Without flattering or rebuking them, you should carefully
convince them by examining that meaning and that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable misconstrues
the meaning but gets the phrasing right.' You should neither approve nor
dismiss them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the phrasing, the meaning
may be either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose they reply,
'This meaning fits the phrasing better than that.' Without flattering or
rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining that meaning.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the
meaning correctly but mistakes the phrasing.' You should neither approve
nor dismiss them, but say, 'Reverend, if this is the meaning, the
phrasing may be either this or that: which is more fitting?' Suppose
they reply, 'This phrasing fits the meaning better than that.' Without
flattering or rebuking, you should carefully convince them by examining
that phrasing.

Suppose another spiritual companion were to recite the teaching in the
Saṅgha. Now, you might think, 'This venerable construes the
meaning correctly and gets the phrasing right.' Saying 'Good!' you
should express approval and appreciation of that mendicant's statement,
and then say to them, 'We are fortunate, reverend, so very fortunate to
see a venerable such as yourself, so well-versed in the meaning and the
phrasing, as one of our spiritual companions!'

## 8. The Reasons for Allowing Requisites

Cunda, I do not teach you solely for restraining defilements that affect
this life. Nor do I teach solely for protecting against defilements that
affect lives to come. I teach both for restraining defilements that
affect this life and protecting against defilements that affect lives to
come.

And that's why I have allowed robes for you that suffice[^209] only for
the sake of warding off cold and heat; for warding off the touch of
flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles; and for covering up the
private parts. I have allowed almsfood for you that suffices only to
sustain this body, avoid harm, and support spiritual practice; so that
you will put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new
discomfort, and will keep on living blamelessly and at ease. I have
allowed lodgings for you that suffice only for the sake of warding off
cold and heat; for warding off the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind,
sun, and reptiles; to shelter from harsh weather and to enjoy retreat. I
have allowed medicines and supplies for the sick for you that suffice
only for the sake of warding off the pains of illness and to promote
good health.

## 9. Indulgence in Pleasure

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure.'[^210] You should say
to them, 'What is that indulgence in pleasure? For there are many
different kinds of indulgence in pleasure.'

These four kinds of indulgence in pleasure, Cunda, are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
What four?

It's when some fool makes themselves happy and pleased by killing living
creatures. This is the first kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by theft. This
is the second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone makes themselves happy and pleased by lying. This
is the third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, someone amuses themselves, supplied and provided with the
five kinds of sensual stimulation. This is the fourth kind of indulgence
in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure that are low, crude,
ordinary, ignoble, and pointless. They don't lead to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Not so!' It isn't right to say that about you; it
misrepresents you with an untruth.

Cunda, these four kinds of indulgence in pleasure lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.[^211] What four?

It's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. This is the first kind of indulgence in
pleasure.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This is the
second kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is the
third kind of indulgence in pleasure.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This
is the fourth kind of indulgence in pleasure.

These are the four kinds of indulgence in pleasure which lead solely to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment.

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.'
They should be told, 'Exactly so!' It's right to say that about you; it
doesn't misrepresent you with an untruth.

## 10. The Benefits of Indulgence in Pleasure

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'How many
fruits and benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four ways?' You should say to them, 'Four benefits may
be expected by those who live indulging in pleasure in these four ways.
What four?

Firstly, with the ending of three fetters a mendicant becomes a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening. This is the first fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant---with the ending of three fetters, and the
weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---becomes a once-returner. They
come back to this world once only, then make an end of suffering. This
is the second fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, with the ending of the five lower fetters, a mendicant is
reborn spontaneously and will become extinguished there, not liable to
return from that world. This is the third fruit and benefit.

Furthermore, a mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the fourth
fruit and benefit.

These four benefits may be expected by those who live indulging in
pleasure in these four ways.'[^212]

## 11. Things Impossible for the Perfected

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetics
who follow the Sakyan are fickle.'[^213] You should say to them,
'Reverends, these things have been taught and pointed out for his
disciples by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha, not to be transgressed so long as life lasts.
Suppose there was a boundary pillar or an iron pillar with deep
foundations, firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable. In the same
way, these things have been taught and pointed out for his disciples by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha, not to be transgressed so long as life lasts.

A mendicant who is perfected---with defilements ended, who has completed
the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment---can't transgress
in nine respects.[^214] A mendicant with defilements ended can't
deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something with the
intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store up goods
for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay person. And they
can't make decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility, stupidity, or
cowardice. A mendicant who is perfected can't transgress in these nine
respects.'

## 12. Questions and Answers

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'The ascetic
Gotama demonstrates boundless knowledge and vision of the past, but not
of the future. What's up with that?' Those wanderers, like incompetent
fools, seem to imagine that one kind of knowledge and vision can be
demonstrated by means of another kind of knowledge and vision.[^215]

Regarding the past, the Realized One has knowledge stemming from memory.
He recollects as far as he wants.

Regarding the future, the Realized One has the knowledge born of
awakening:[^216] 'This is my last rebirth; now there'll be no more
future lives.'

If a question about the past is untrue, false, and pointless, the
Realized One does not reply. If a question about the past is true and
correct, but pointless, he does not reply. If a question about the past
is true, correct, and beneficial, he knows the right time to reply. And
the Realized One replies to questions about the future or the present in
the same way.

And so the Realized One has speech that's well-timed, true, meaningful,
in line with the teaching and training. That's why he's called the
'Realized One'.[^217]

In this world---with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---whatever is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind, all that has been understood by the Realized One.
That's why he's called the 'Realized One'.

From the night when the Realized One understands the supreme perfect
awakening until the night he becomes fully extinguished---in the element
of extinguishment with no residue---everything he speaks, says, and
expresses is real, not otherwise. That's why he's called the 'Realized
One'.

The Realized One does as he says, and says as he does. Since this is so,
that's why he's called the 'Realized One'. In this world---with its
gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---the Realized One is the
vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of power.

## 13. The Undeclared Points

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'Is this your
view: "A Realized One exists after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile"?'[^218] You should say to them, 'Reverend, this
has not been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been declared by the
Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One both
exists and doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything
else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not been
declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'Then is this your view: "A Realized One
neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile"?' You should say to them, 'This too has not
been declared by the Buddha.'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this not been declared by the
ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's not beneficial or
relevant to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It doesn't lead to
disillusionment, dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and
extinguishment. That's why it hasn't been declared by the Buddha.'

## 14. The Declared Points

It's possible that wanderers of other religions might say, 'But what has
been declared by the ascetic Gotama?' You should say to them, 'What has
been declared by the Buddha is this: "This is suffering"---"This is the
origin of suffering"---"This is the cessation of suffering"---"This is
the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering."'

The wanderers might say, 'But why has this been declared by the ascetic
Gotama?' You should say to them, 'Because it's beneficial and relevant
to the fundamentals of the spiritual life. It leads to disillusionment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, insight, awakening, and extinguishment.
That's why it has been declared by the Buddha.'

## 15. Views of the Past

Cunda, I have explained to you as they should be explained the views
that some rely on regarding the past.[^219] Shall I explain them to you
in the wrong way? I have explained to you as they should be explained
the views that some rely on regarding the future. Shall I explain them
to you in the wrong way?

What are the views that some rely on regarding the past? There are some
ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self and the
cosmos are eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'
There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'The self and the cosmos are not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. The self and the cosmos are
made by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and
another, or they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another.
Pleasure and pain are eternal, or not eternal, or both eternal and not
eternal, or neither eternal nor not eternal. Pleasure and pain are made
by oneself, or made by another, or made by both oneself and another, or
they have arisen by chance, not made by oneself or another. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that
the self and the cosmos are eternal, and say, 'Reverends, is this what
you say, "The self and the cosmos are eternal"?' But when they say,
'Yes! This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I don't
acknowledge that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have
different opinions on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that
are equal to my own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is
superior when it comes to the higher exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the past.

## 16. Views of the Future

What are the views that some rely on regarding the future? There are
some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view: 'The self is
healthy after death, and formed ... or formless ... or both formed and
formless ... or neither formed nor formless ... or percipient ... or
non-percipient ... or neither percipient nor non-percipient ... or the
self is annihilated and destroyed when the body breaks up, and doesn't
exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile.'

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that,
'The self is formed and healthy after death,' and say, 'Reverends, is
this what you say, "The self is formed and healthy after death"?' But
when they say, 'Yes! This is the only truth, anything else is futile,' I
don't acknowledge that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have
different opinions on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that
are equal to my own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is
superior when it comes to the higher exposition.

Regarding this, I go up to the ascetics and brahmins who assert all the
other views as described above. And in each case, I don't acknowledge
that. Why is that? Because there are beings who have different opinions
on this topic. I don't see any such expositions that are equal to my
own, still less superior. Rather, I am the one who is superior when it
comes to the higher exposition.

These are the views that some rely on regarding the future, which I have
explained to you as they should be explained. Shall I explain them to
you in the wrong way?

I have taught and pointed out the four kinds of mindfulness meditation
for giving up and going beyond all these views of the past and the
future.[^220] What four? It's when a mendicant meditates by observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. These are the four kinds of mindfulness
meditation that I have taught for giving up and going beyond all these
views of the past and the future."

Now at that time Venerable Upavāna was standing behind the
Buddha fanning him. He said to the Buddha, "It's incredible, sir, it's
amazing! This exposition of the teaching is impressive, sir, it is very
impressive. Sir, what is the name of this exposition of the teaching?"

"Well then, Upavāna, you may remember this exposition of
the teaching as 'The Impressive Discourse'."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Upavāna
approved what the Buddha said.

