# DN 33 Reciting in Concert  *Saṅgītisutta*

So I have heard.  At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Mallas together with a large Saṅgha of five
hundred mendicants when he arrived at a Mallian town named
Pāvā.[^318] There he stayed in Cunda the smith's mango
grove.[^319]

Now at that time a new town hall named Ubbhaṭaka had
recently been constructed for the Mallas of Pāvā. It had
not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any person at
all.[^320] The Mallas of Pāvā also heard that the Buddha
had arrived and was staying in Cunda's mango grove. Then they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, a new
town hall named Ubbhaṭaka has recently been constructed for
the Mallas of Pāvā. It has not yet been occupied by an
ascetic or brahmin or any person at all. May the Buddha be the first to
use it, and only then will the Mallas of Pāvā use it. That
would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the Mallas of
Pāvā." The Buddha consented in silence.

Then, knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Mallas got up from
their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on
their right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread
carpets all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil
lamp. Then they went back to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and
told him of their preparations, saying, "Please, sir, come at your
convenience."

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new
town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having
washed his feet he entered the town hall and sat against the central
column facing east. The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed
their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing
east, with the Buddha right in front of them. The Mallas of
Pāvā also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat
against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of
them.

The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing up,
and inspiring the Mallas with a Dhamma talk. Then he dismissed them,
"The night is getting late, Vāseṭṭhas.[^321] Please go at
your convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the Mallas. They got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before
leaving.

Soon after they left, the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha
of mendicants, who were so very silent. He addressed Venerable
Sāriputta, "Sāriputta, the Saṅgha
of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness. Give them some Dhamma
talk as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll stretch it."[^322]

"Yes, sir," Sāriputta replied.

And then the Buddha spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

Now at that time the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan had
recently passed away at Pāvā.[^323] With his passing the
Jain ascetics split, dividing into two factions, arguing, quarreling,
and disputing, continually wounding each other with barbed words: "You
don't understand this teaching and training. I understand this teaching
and training. What, you understand this teaching and training? You're
practicing wrong. I'm practicing right. I stay on topic, you don't. You
said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. What you've thought so much about has been
disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save your doctrine! You're
trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!"

You'd think there was nothing but slaughter going on among the Jain
ascetics. And the Jain Ñātika's white-clothed lay disciples
were disillusioned, dismayed, and disappointed in the Jain ascetics.
They were equally disappointed with a teaching and training so poorly
explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating, not leading to peace,
proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened Buddha, with broken
monument and without a refuge.

Then Sāriputta told the mendicants about these things. He
went on to say, "That's what happens, reverends, when a teaching and
training is poorly explained and poorly propounded, not emancipating,
not leading to peace, proclaimed by someone who is not a fully awakened
Buddha. But this teaching is well explained and well propounded to us by
the Blessed One, emancipating, leading to peace, proclaimed by someone
who is a fully awakened Buddha. You should all recite this in concert,
without disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time.
That would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of
sympathy for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods
and humans.

And what is that teaching?

## 1. Ones

There are teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained by
the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha.[^324] You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans. What are the teachings grouped by one?

All sentient beings are sustained by food.[^325]

All sentient beings are sustained by conditions.[^326]

These are the teachings grouped by one that have been rightly explained
by the Blessed One, who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha.[^327] You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans.

## 2. Twos

There are teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by two?

Name and form.

Ignorance and craving for continued existence.[^328]

Views favoring continued existence and views favoring ending
existence.[^329]

Lack of conscience and prudence.

Conscience and prudence.

Being hard to admonish and having bad friends.

Being easy to admonish and having good friends.

Skill in offenses and skill in resolving offenses.[^330]

Skill in meditative attainments and skill in emerging from those
attainments.[^331]

Skill in the elements and skill in application of mind.[^332]

Skill in the sense fields and skill in dependent origination.[^333]

Skill in what is possible and skill in what is impossible.[^334]

Integrity and scrupulousness.

Patience and sweetness.

Friendliness and hospitality.

Harmlessness and purity.

Lack of mindfulness and lack of situational awareness.

Mindfulness and situational awareness.

Not guarding the sense doors and eating too much.

Guarding the sense doors and moderation in eating.

The power of reflection and the power of development.[^335]

The power of mindfulness and the power of immersion.

Serenity and discernment.

The basis of serenity and the basis of exertion.[^336]

Exertion, and not being scattered.

Failure in ethics and failure in view.

Accomplishment in ethics and accomplishment in view.

Purification of ethics and purification of view.

Purification of view and making an effort in line with that view.

Inspiration, and making a suitable effort when inspired by inspiring
places.

To never be content with skillful qualities, and to never stop trying.

Knowledge and freedom.

Knowledge of ending and knowledge of non-arising.[^337]

These are the teachings grouped by two that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 3. Threes

There are teachings grouped by three that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by three?

*Three unskillful roots:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three skillful roots:* contentment, love, and understanding.

*Three ways of performing bad conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three ways of performing good conduct:* by body, speech, and mind.

*Three unskillful thoughts:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful thoughts:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful intentions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful intentions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful perceptions:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful perceptions:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Three unskillful elements:* sensuality, malice, and cruelty.

*Three skillful elements:* renunciation, good will, and harmlessness.

*Another three elements:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three elements:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Another three elements:* lower, middle, and higher.[^338]

*Three cravings:* for sensual pleasures, to continue existence, and to
end existence.

*Another three cravings:* sensuality, form, and formlessness.

*Another three cravings:* form, formlessness, and cessation.

*Three fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of
precepts and observances.

*Three defilements:* sensuality, desire for continued existence, and
ignorance.

*Three realms of existence:* sensual, form, and formless.

*Three searches:* for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path.

*Three kinds of discrimination:* 'I'm better', 'I'm equal', and 'I'm
worse'.

*Three periods:* past, future, and present.

*Three extremes:* substantial reality, the origin of substantial
reality, and the cessation of substantial reality.[^339]

*Three feelings:* pleasure, pain, and neutral.

*Three forms of suffering:* the suffering inherent in painful feeling,
the suffering inherent in conditions, and the suffering inherent in
perishing.[^340]

*Three heaps:* the heap of surety in the wrong way, the heap of surety
in the right way, and the heap of lack of surety.[^341]

*Three darknesses:* one is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and lacking
confidence about the past, future, and present.[^342]

*Three things a Realized One need not hide:* The Realized One's behavior
by way of body, speech, and mind is pure. He has no misconduct in these
three ways that need be hidden, thinking: 'Don't let others find this
out about me!'[^343]

*Three possessions:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Three fires:* greed, hate, and delusion.

*Another three fires:* a fire for those worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, a fire for householders, and a fire for those worthy of a
religious donation.[^344]

*Threefold classification of the physical:* visible and resistant,
invisible and resistant, and invisible and non-resistant.[^345]

*Three choices:* good choices, bad choices, and imperturbable choices.

*Three individuals:* a trainee, an adept, and one who is neither a
trainee nor an adept.[^346]

*Three seniors:* a senior by birth, a senior in the teaching, and a
senior by convention.[^347]

*Three grounds for making merit:* giving, ethical conduct, and
meditation.

*Three grounds for accusations:* what is seen, heard, and suspected.

*Three kinds of sensual rebirth:* There are sentient beings who desire
what is present. They fall under the sway of presently arisen sensual
pleasures. Namely, humans, some gods, and some beings in the underworld.
This is the first kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who
desire to create. Having repeatedly created, they fall under the sway of
sensual pleasures. Namely, the gods who love to imagine. This is the
second kind of sensual rebirth. There are sentient beings who desire
what is created by others. They fall under the sway of sensual pleasures
created by others. Namely, the gods who control what is imagined by
others. This is the third kind of sensual rebirth.[^348]

*Three kinds of pleasant rebirth:* There are sentient beings who, having
repeatedly given rise to it, dwell in pleasure. Namely, the gods of the
Divinity's host. This is the first pleasant rebirth. There are sentient
beings who are drenched, steeped, filled, and soaked with pleasure.
Every so often they feel inspired to exclaim: 'Oh, what bliss! Oh, what
bliss!' Namely, the gods of streaming radiance. This is the second
pleasant rebirth. There are sentient beings who are drenched, steeped,
filled, and soaked with pleasure. Since they're truly content, they
experience pleasure. Namely, the gods of universal beauty. This is the
third pleasant rebirth.[^349]

*Three kinds of wisdom:* the wisdom of a trainee, the wisdom of an
adept, and the wisdom of one who is neither a trainee nor an
adept.[^350]

*Another three kinds of wisdom:* wisdom produced by thought, learning,
and meditation.[^351]

*Three weapons:* learning, seclusion, and wisdom.[^352]

*Three faculties:* the faculty of understanding that one's enlightenment
is imminent, the faculty of enlightenment, and the faculty of one who is
enlightened.[^353]

*Three eyes:* the eye of the flesh, the eye of clairvoyance, and the eye
of wisdom.

*Three trainings:* in higher ethics, higher mind, and higher wisdom.

*Three kinds of development:* the development of physical endurance, the
development of the mind, and the development of wisdom.[^354]

*Three unsurpassable qualities:* unsurpassable seeing, practice, and
freedom.[^355]

*Three kinds of immersion:* Immersion with placing the mind and keeping
it connected. Immersion without placing the mind, merely keeping it
connected. Immersion without placing the mind or keeping it
connected.[^356]

*Another three kinds of immersion:* emptiness, signless, and
undirected.[^357]

*Three purities:* purity of body, speech, and mind.[^358]

*Three kinds of sagacity:* sagacity of body, speech, and mind.[^359]

*Three skills:* skill in progress, skill in regress, and skill in
means.[^360]

*Three vanities:* the vanity of health, the vanity of youth, and the
vanity of life.[^361]

*Three ways of putting something in charge:* putting oneself, the world,
or the teaching in charge.[^362]

*Three topics of discussion:* You might discuss the past: 'That is how
it was in the past.' You might discuss the future: 'That is how it will
be in the future.' Or you might discuss the present: 'This is how it is
at present.'[^363]

*Three knowledges:* recollection of past lives, knowledge of the death
and rebirth of sentient beings, and knowledge of the ending of
defilements.

*Three meditative abidings:* the heavenly meditation, the divine
meditation, and the noble meditation.[^364]

*Three demonstrations:* The demonstration of psychic power, the
demonstration of revealing, and the demonstration of instruction.[^365]

These are the teachings grouped by three that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 4. Fours

There are teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by four?

*Four kinds of mindfulness meditation:* It's when a mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of
covetousness and displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an
aspect of feelings ... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful,
rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

*Four right efforts:* A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an
effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities
don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the
mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen are
given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities arise. They generate enthusiasm,
try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful
qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature,
and are completed by development.

*Four bases of psychic power:* A mendicant develops the basis of psychic
power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to mental
development, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry, and active
effort.

*Four absorptions:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first
absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while
placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the mind
and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness.

*Four ways of developing immersion further:* There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to blissful meditation in this
life. There is a way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision. There is a way of developing immersion
further that leads to mindfulness and awareness. There is a way of
developing immersion further that leads to the ending of defilements.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
blissful meditation in this life? It's when a mendicant, quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and
remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ... fourth
absorption. This is the way of developing immersion further that leads
to blissful meditation in this life.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
gaining knowledge and vision? A mendicant applies their mind to the
perception of light, focusing on the perception of day regardless of
whether it's night or day. And so, with an open and unenveloped heart,
they develop a mind that's full of radiance. This is the way of
developing immersion further that leads to gaining knowledge and vision.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to
mindfulness and awareness? A mendicant knows feelings as they arise, as
they remain, and as they go away. They know perceptions as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. They know thoughts as they arise,
as they remain, and as they go away. This is the way of developing
immersion further that leads to mindfulness and awareness.

And what is the way of developing immersion further that leads to the
ending of defilements? A mendicant meditates observing rise and fall in
the five grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such are feelings ... perceptions ...
choices ... consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is
the ending of consciousness.' This is the way of developing immersion
further that leads to the ending of defilements.[^366]

*Four limitless states:* A mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of
love to one direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the
fourth. In the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around,
they spread a heart full of love to the whole world---abundant,
expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill will. They meditate
spreading a heart full of compassion ... rejoicing ... equanimity to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive,
limitless, free of enmity and ill will.[^367]

*Four formless states:* A mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of
form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and
remains in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception.[^368]

*Four supports:* After appraisal, a mendicant uses some things, endures
some things, avoids some things, and gets rid of some things.[^369]

*Four noble traditions:* A mendicant is content with any kind of robe,
and praises such contentment. They don't try to get hold of a robe in an
improper way. They don't get upset if they don't get a robe. And if they
do get a robe, they use it untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the
drawback, and understanding the escape. And on account of that they
don't glorify themselves or put others down. A mendicant who is deft,
tireless, aware, and mindful in this is said to stand in the ancient,
primordial noble tradition.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of almsfood ...

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of lodgings ...

Furthermore, a mendicant enjoys giving up and loves to give up. They
enjoy meditation and love to meditate. But they don't glorify themselves
or put down others on account of their love for giving up and
meditation. A mendicant who is deft, tireless, aware, and mindful in
this is said to stand in the ancient, primordial noble tradition.[^370]

*Four efforts:* The efforts to restrain, to give up, to develop, and to
preserve.[^371] And what is the effort to restrain? When a mendicant
sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. This is
called the effort to restrain.

And what is the effort to give up? It's when a mendicant doesn't
tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that's arisen, but gives
it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and obliterates it. They don't
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but give them
up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. This is called
the effort to give up.

And what is the effort to develop? It's when a mendicant develops the
awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy,
rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. This is
called the effort to develop.

And what is the effort to preserve? It's when a mendicant preserves a
meditation subject that's a fine basis of immersion: the perception of a
skeleton, a worm-infested corpse, a livid corpse, a split open corpse,
or a bloated corpse. This is called the effort to preserve.

*Four knowledges:* knowledge of the present phenomena, inferential
knowledge, knowledge of others' minds, and conventional knowledge.[^372]

*Another four knowledges:* knowing about suffering, the origin of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to
the cessation of suffering.

*Four factors of stream-entry:* associating with true persons, listening
to the true teaching, rational application of mind, and practicing in
line with the teaching.[^373]

*Four factors of a stream-enterer:* A noble disciple has experiential
confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They have experiential confidence in the
teaching: 'The teaching is well explained by the Buddha---apparent in
the present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant,
so that sensible people can know it for themselves.' They have
experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble
ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised
by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion.[^374]

*Four fruits of the ascetic life:* stream-entry, once-return,
non-return, and perfection.[^375]

*Four elements:* earth, water, fire, and air.

*Four foods:* solid food, whether solid or subtle; contact is the
second, mental intention the third, and consciousness the fourth.[^376]

*Four bases for consciousness to remain:* As long as consciousness
remains, it remains involved with form, supported by form, founded on
form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it grows, increases, and
matures. Or consciousness remains involved with feeling ... Or
consciousness remains involved with perception ... Or as long as
consciousness remains, it remains involved with choices, supported by
choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it
grows, increases, and matures.[^377]

*Four prejudices:* making decisions prejudiced by favoritism, hostility,
stupidity, and cowardice.[^378]

*Four things that give rise to craving:* Craving arises in a mendicant
for the sake of robes, almsfood, lodgings, or rebirth in this or that
state.[^379]

*Four ways of practice:* painful practice with slow insight, painful
practice with swift insight, pleasant practice with slow insight, and
pleasant practice with swift insight.[^380]

*Another four ways of practice:* impatient practice, patient practice,
taming practice, and calming practice.

*Four footprints of the Dhamma:* contentment, good will, right
mindfulness, and right immersion.[^381]

*Four ways of taking up practices:* There is a way of taking up
practices that is painful now and results in future pain. There is a way
of taking up practices that is painful now but results in future
pleasure. There is a way of taking up practices that is pleasant now but
results in future pain. There is a way of taking up practices that is
pleasant now and results in future pleasure.

*Four spectrums of the teaching:* ethics, immersion, wisdom, and
freedom.

*Four powers:* energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.[^382]

*Four foundations:* the foundations of wisdom, truth, generosity, and
peace.[^383]

*Four ways of answering questions:* There is a question that should be
answered categorically. There is a question that should be answered
analytically. There is a question that should be answered with a
counter-question. There is a question that should be set aside.[^384]

*Four deeds:* There are deeds that are dark with dark result. There are
deeds that are bright with bright result. There are deeds that are dark
and bright with dark and bright result.[^385] There are neither dark nor
bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the
ending of deeds.[^386]

*Four things to be realized:* Past lives are to be realized with
recollection. The passing away and rebirth of sentient beings is to be
realized with vision. The eight liberations are to be realized with
direct meditative experience. The ending of defilements is to be
realized with wisdom.[^387]

*Four floods:* the floods of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[^388]

*Four yokes:* the yokes of sensuality, desire for rebirth, views, and
ignorance.[^389]

*Four unyokings:* unyoking from the yokes of sensuality, desire for
rebirth, views, and ignorance.

*Four ties:* the personal ties to covetousness, ill will,
misapprehension of precepts and observances, and the insistence that
this is the only truth.[^390]

*Four kinds of grasping:* grasping at sensual pleasures, views, precepts
and observances, and theories of a self.

*Four kinds of reproduction:* reproduction for creatures born from an
egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously.[^391]

*Four kinds of conception:* Someone is unaware when conceived in their
mother's womb, unaware as they remain there, and unaware as they emerge.
This is the first kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when
conceived in their mother's womb, but unaware as they remain there, and
unaware as they emerge. This is the second kind of conception.
Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived in their mother's womb,
aware as they remain there, but unaware as they emerge. This is the
third kind of conception. Furthermore, someone is aware when conceived
in their mother's womb, aware as they remain there, and aware as they
emerge. This is the fourth kind of conception.[^392]

*Four kinds of reincarnation in a life-form:* There is a reincarnation
in a life-form where only one's own intention is effective, not that of
others. There is a reincarnation in a life-form where only the intention
of others is effective, not one's own. There is a reincarnation in a
life-form where both one's own and others' intentions are effective.
There is a reincarnation in a life-form where neither one's own nor
others' intentions are effective.[^393]

*Four ways of purifying a religious donation:* There's a religious
donation that's purified by the giver, not the recipient. There's a
religious donation that's purified by the recipient, not the giver.
There's a religious donation that's purified by neither the giver nor
the recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified by both the
giver and the recipient.[^394]

*Four ways of being inclusive:* giving, kindly words, taking care, and
equality.[^395]

*Four ignoble expressions:* speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical.[^396]

*Four noble expressions:* refraining from speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought,
or known something, but you haven't.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you haven't.

*Another four ignoble expressions:* saying you haven't seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and you have.

*Another four noble expressions:* saying you've seen, heard, thought, or
known something, and you have.

*Four persons:* One person mortifies themselves, committed to the
practice of mortifying themselves. One person mortifies others,
committed to the practice of mortifying others. One person mortifies
themselves and others, committed to the practice of mortifying
themselves and others. One person doesn't mortify either themselves or
others, committed to the practice of not mortifying themselves or
others. They live without wishes in this very life, quenched, cooled,
experiencing bliss, with self become divine.[^397]

*Another four persons:* One person practices to benefit themselves, but
not others. One person practices to benefit others, but not themselves.
One person practices to benefit neither themselves nor others. One
person practices to benefit both themselves and others.

*Another four persons:* the dark bound for darkness, the dark bound for
light, the light bound for darkness, and the light bound for
light.[^398]

*Another four persons:* the confirmed ascetic, the white lotus ascetic,
the pink lotus ascetic, and the exquisite ascetic of ascetics.[^399]

These are the teachings grouped by four that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.


## 5. Fives

There are teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by five?

*Five aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.[^400]

*Five grasping aggregates:* form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

*Five kinds of sensual stimulation:* Sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds
known by the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the
tongue ... Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing.

*Five destinations:* hell, the animal realm, the ghost realm, humanity,
and the gods.[^401]

*Five kinds of stinginess:* stinginess with dwellings, families,
material things, praise, and the teachings.[^402]

*Five hindrances:* sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness,
restlessness and remorse, and doubt.

*Five lower fetters:* substantialist view, doubt, misapprehension of
precepts and observances, sensual desire, and ill will.

*Five higher fetters:* desire for rebirth in the realm of luminous form,
desire for rebirth in the formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and
ignorance.

*Five precepts:* refraining from killing living creatures, stealing,
sexual misconduct, lying, and consuming beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants.

*Five things that can't be done:* A mendicant with defilements ended
can't deliberately take the life of a living creature, take something
with the intention to steal, have sex, tell a deliberate lie, or store
up goods for their own enjoyment like they used to as a lay
person.[^403]

*Five losses:* loss of relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and view. It
is not because of loss of relatives, wealth, or health that sentient
beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a place of
loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. It is because of loss of ethics
or view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death,
are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.[^404]

*Five endowments:* endowment with relatives, wealth, health, ethics, and
view. It is not because of endowment with family, wealth, or health that
sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. It is because of endowment with ethics or
view that sentient beings, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

*Five drawbacks for an unethical person because of their failure in
ethics:* Firstly, an unethical person loses great wealth on account of
negligence. This is the first drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
gets a bad reputation. This is the second drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person enters any kind of assembly timid and embarrassed,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third drawback. Furthermore, an unethical person
feels lost when they die. This is the fourth drawback. Furthermore, an
unethical person, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. This is the fifth
drawback.[^405]

*Five benefits for an ethical person because of their accomplishment in
ethics:* Firstly, an ethical person gains great wealth on account of
diligence. This is the first benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person
gets a good reputation. This is the second benefit. Furthermore, an
ethical person enters any kind of assembly bold and self-assured,
whether it's an assembly of aristocrats, brahmins, householders, or
ascetics. This is the third benefit. Furthermore, an ethical person dies
not feeling lost. This is the fourth benefit. Furthermore, when an
ethical person's body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm. This is the fifth benefit.

*A mendicant who wants to accuse another should first establish five
things in themselves:* I will speak at the right time, not at the wrong
time. I will speak truthfully, not falsely. I will speak gently, not
harshly. I will speak beneficially, not harmfully. I will speak
lovingly, not from secret hate. A mendicant who wants to accuse another
should first establish these five things in themselves.[^406]

*Five factors that support meditation:* A mendicant has faith in the
Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' They are rarely ill or unwell. Their
stomach digests well, being neither too hot nor too cold, but just
right, and fit for meditation. They're not devious or deceitful. They
reveal themselves honestly to the Teacher or sensible spiritual
companions. They live with energy roused up for giving up unskillful
qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly
vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing skillful
qualities. They're wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing
away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of
suffering.[^407]

*Five pure abodes:* Aviha, Atappa, the gods fair to see, the fair seeing
gods, and Akaniṭṭha.[^408]

*Five non-returners:* one who is extinguished between one life and the
next, one who is extinguished upon landing, one who is extinguished
without extra effort, one who is extinguished with extra effort, and one
who heads upstream, going to the Akaniṭṭha realm.[^409]

*Five kinds of hard-heartedness:* Firstly, a mendicant has doubts about
the Teacher. They're uncertain, undecided, and lacking confidence. This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first kind of hard-heartedness.
Furthermore, a mendicant has doubts about the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... the training ... A mendicant is angry and upset
with their spiritual companions, resentful and closed off. This being
so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment, persistence,
and striving. This is the fifth kind of hard-heartedness.[^410]

*Five shackles of the heart:* Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed,
desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual pleasures.
This being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the first shackle of the heart.
Furthermore, a mendicant isn't free of greed for the body ... They're
not free of greed for form ... They eat as much as they like until their
bellies are full, then indulge in the pleasures of sleeping, lying down,
and drowsing ... They lead the spiritual life hoping to be reborn in one
of the orders of gods, thinking: 'By this precept or observance or
fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!' This
being so, their mind doesn't incline toward keenness, commitment,
persistence, and striving. This is the fifth shackle of the heart.[^411]

*Five faculties:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.

*Another five faculties:* pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and
equanimity.

*Another five faculties:* faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom.

*Five elements of escape:* Take a case where a mendicant focuses on
sensual pleasures, but on that their mind does not leap forth, gain
confidence, settle down, and become decided. But when they focus on
renunciation, on that their mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles
down, and becomes decided. Their mind is in a good state, well
developed, well risen, well freed, and well detached from sensual
pleasures. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of sensual pleasures, so they don't experience that
kind of feeling. This is how the escape from sensual pleasures is
explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on ill will, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on good will, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from ill
will. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that
arise because of ill will, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from ill will is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on harming, but their mind
does not leap forth ... But when they focus on compassion, their mind
leaps forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from
harming. They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements
that arise because of harming, so they don't experience that kind of
feeling. This is how the escape from harming is explained.

Take another case where a mendicant focuses on form, but their mind does
not leap forth ... But when they focus on the formless, their mind leaps
forth ... Their mind is in a good state ... well detached from forms.
They're freed from the distressing and feverish defilements that arise
because of form, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is
how the escape from forms is explained.

Take a case where a mendicant focuses on substantial reality, but their
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided. But when they focus on the ending of substantial reality, their
mind leaps forth, gains confidence, settles down, and becomes decided.
Their mind is in a good state, well developed, well risen, well freed,
and well detached from substantial reality. They're freed from the
distressing and feverish defilements that arise because of substantial
reality, so they don't experience that kind of feeling. This is how the
escape from substantial reality is explained.[^412]

*Five opportunities for freedom:* Firstly, the Teacher or a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. That mendicant feels
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma, no matter how
the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches it. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.
This is the first opportunity for freedom.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. ...
Or the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or the mendicant thinks about and considers the
teaching in their heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and
memorized it. ... Or a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. That mendicant feels inspired by the meaning and the teaching in
that Dhamma, no matter how a meditation subject as a basis of immersion
is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind
becomes immersed. This is the fifth opportunity for freedom.[^413]

*Five perceptions that ripen in freedom:* the perception of
impermanence, the perception of suffering in impermanence, the
perception of not-self in suffering, the perception of giving up, and
the perception of fading away.[^414]

These are the teachings grouped by five that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 6. Sixes

There are teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by six?

*Six interior sense fields:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six exterior sense fields:* sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches,
and ideas.

*Six classes of consciousness:* eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
consciousness.

*Six classes of contact:* contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, and mind.

*Six classes of feeling:* feeling born of contact through the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind.

*Six classes of perception:* perceptions of sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six bodies of intention:* intention regarding sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas.

*Six classes of craving:* craving for sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touches, and ideas.

*Six kinds of disrespect:* A mendicant lacks respect and reverence for
the Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, the training,
diligence, and hospitality.[^415]

*Six kinds of respect:* A mendicant has respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, the training,
diligence, and hospitality.[^416]

*Six preoccupations with happiness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for happiness. Hearing a sound
with the ear ... Smelling an odor with the nose ... Tasting a flavor
with the tongue ...

Feeling a touch with the body ... Knowing an idea with the mind, one is
preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for happiness.[^417]

*Six preoccupations with sadness:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one is
preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for sadness. ... Knowing an idea
with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis for
sadness.

*Six preoccupations with equanimity:* Seeing a sight with the eye, one
is preoccupied with a sight that's a basis for equanimity. ... Knowing
an idea with the mind, one is preoccupied with an idea that's a basis
for equanimity.

*Six warm-hearted qualities:* Firstly, a mendicant consistently treats
their spiritual companions with bodily kindness, both in public and in
private. This warm-hearted quality makes for fondness and respect,
conducing to inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with verbal kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant consistently treats their spiritual companions
with mental kindness, both in public and in private. This too is a
warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant shares without reservation any material things
they have gained by legitimate means, even the food placed in the
alms-bowl, using them in common with their ethical spiritual companions.
This too is a warm-hearted quality.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives according to the precepts shared with
their spiritual companions, both in public and in private. Those
precepts are intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating,
praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. This
too is a warm-hearted quality.

They live according to the view shared with their spiritual companions,
both in public and in private. That view is noble and emancipating, and
brings one who practices it to the complete ending of suffering. This
warm-hearted quality too makes for fondness and respect, conducing to
inclusion, harmony, and unity, without quarreling.[^418]

*Six roots of arguments:* Firstly, a mendicant is irritable and
acrimonious. Such a mendicant lacks respect and reverence for the
Teacher, the teaching, and the Saṅgha, and they don't
fulfill the training. They create a dispute in the Saṅgha,
which is for the detriment and suffering of the people, for the harm,
detriment, and suffering of gods and humans. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

Furthermore, a mendicant is offensive and contemptuous ... They're
jealous and stingy ... They're devious and deceitful ... They have
corrupt wishes and wrong view ... They're attached to their own views,
holding them tight, and refusing to let go. If you see such a root of
arguments in yourselves or others, you should try to give up this bad
thing. If you don't see it, you should practice so that it doesn't come
up in the future. That's how to give up this bad root of arguments, so
it doesn't come up in the future.

*Six elements:* earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.

*Six elements of escape:* Take a mendicant who says: 'I've developed the
heart's release by love. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my
basis, kept it up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet
somehow ill will still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the heart's
release by love has been developed and properly implemented, yet somehow
ill will still occupies the mind. For it is the heart's release by love
that is the escape from ill will.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
compassion. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow the
thought of harming still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not
so, venerable! ... For it is the heart's release by compassion that is
the escape from thoughts of harming.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
rejoicing. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow discontent
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by rejoicing that is the escape from
discontent.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the heart's release by
equanimity. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow desire
still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so, venerable! ...
For it is the heart's release by equanimity that is the escape from
desire.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I've developed the signless release of
the heart. I've cultivated it, made it my vehicle and my basis, kept it
up, consolidated it, and properly implemented it. Yet somehow my
consciousness still follows after signs.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! ... For it is the signless release of the heart that is the
escape from all signs.'

Take another mendicant who says: 'I'm rid of the conceit "I am". And I
don't regard anything as "I am this". Yet somehow the dart of doubt and
indecision still occupies my mind.' They should be told, 'Not so,
venerable! Don't say that. Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that. It's impossible, reverend, it cannot happen that the conceit
"I am" has been done away with, and nothing is regarded as "I am this",
yet somehow the dart of doubt and indecision still occupy the mind. For
it is the uprooting of the conceit "I am" that is the escape from the
dart of doubt and indecision.'[^419]

*Six unsurpassable things:* the unsurpassable seeing, listening,
acquisition, training, service, and recollection.[^420]

*Six topics for recollection:* the recollection of the Buddha, the
teaching, the Saṅgha, ethics, generosity, and the deities.

*Six consistent responses:* A mendicant, seeing a sight with their eyes,
is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware.
Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor with their nose ...
Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a touch with their body
... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're neither happy nor sad. They
remain equanimous, mindful and aware.[^421]

*Six classes of rebirth:* Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a
dark result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to a bright
result. Someone born into a dark class gives rise to extinguishment,
which is neither dark nor bright. Someone born into a bright class gives
rise to a bright result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
a dark result. Someone born into a bright class gives rise to
extinguishment, which is neither dark nor bright.[^422]

*Six perceptions that help penetration:* the perception of impermanence,
the perception of suffering in impermanence, the perception of not-self
in suffering, the perception of giving up, the perception of fading
away, and the perception of cessation.[^423]

These are the teachings grouped by six that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 7. Sevens

There are teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by seven?

*Seven riches of the noble ones:* the riches of faith, ethics,
conscience, prudence, learning, generosity, and wisdom.[^424]

*Seven awakening factors:* mindfulness, investigation of principles,
energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

*Seven prerequisites for immersion:* right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right
mindfulness.[^425]

*Seven bad qualities:* a mendicant is faithless, shameless, imprudent,
unlearned, lazy, unmindful, and witless.[^426]

*Seven good qualities:* a mendicant is faithful, conscientious, prudent,
learned, energetic, mindful, and wise.[^427]

*Seven aspects of the teachings of the true persons:* a mendicant knows
the teachings, knows the meaning, knows themselves, knows moderation,
knows the right time, knows assemblies, and knows people.[^428]

*Seven qualifications for graduation:* A mendicant has a keen enthusiasm
to undertake the training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of
desires ... for retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and
alertness ... to penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these
desires in the future.[^429]

*Seven perceptions:* the perception of impermanence, the perception of
not-self, the perception of ugliness, the perception of drawbacks, the
perception of giving up, the perception of fading away, and the
perception of cessation.[^430]

*Seven powers:* faith, energy, conscience, prudence, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom.[^431]

*Seven planes of consciousness:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the fifth plane of
consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the sixth
plane of consciousness.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the seventh plane
of consciousness.[^432]

*Seven persons worthy of a religious donation:* one freed both ways, one
freed by wisdom, a direct witness, one attained to view, one freed by
faith, a follower of teachings, and a follower by faith.

*Seven underlying tendencies:* sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven fetters:* attraction, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to
be reborn, and ignorance.

*Seven principles for the settlement of any disciplinary issues that
might arise:* Resolution face-to-face to be applied. Resolution through
recollection to be granted. Resolution because of past insanity to be
granted. Acting according to what has been admitted. Majority decision.
Further penalty. Covering over as if with grass.[^433]

These are the teachings grouped by seven that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.


## 8. Eights

There are teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by eight?

*Eight wrong ways:* wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong
action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong
immersion.

*Eight right ways:* right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

*Eight persons worthy of a religious donation:* The stream-enterer and
the one practicing to realize the fruit of stream-entry. The
once-returner and the one practicing to realize the fruit of
once-return. The non-returner and the one practicing to realize the
fruit of non-return. The perfected one, and the one practicing for
perfection.

*Eight grounds for laziness:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do.
They think: 'I have some work to do. But while doing it my body will get
tired. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the second ground for
laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the fourth
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the
fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy and unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load
of beans. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy... This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy... This is the seventh
ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for laziness.[^434]

*Eight grounds for arousing energy:* Firstly, a mendicant has some work
to do. They think: 'I have some work to do. While working it's not easy
to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively
rouse up energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized.' They rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up
energy... This is the second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy.'
They rouse up energy... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the fifth
ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the sixth ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy.' They rouse up energy... This is the
seventh ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

*Eight reasons to give:* A person might give a gift after insulting the
recipient. Or they give out of fear. Or they give thinking, 'They gave
to me.' Or they give thinking, 'They'll give to me.' Or they give
thinking, 'It's good to give.' Or they give thinking, 'I cook, they
don't. It wouldn't be right for me to not give to them.' Or they give
thinking, 'By giving this gift I'll get a good reputation.' Or they give
thinking, 'This is an adornment and requisite for the mind.'[^435]

*Eight rebirths by giving:* First, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins
such things as food, drink, clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and
makeup; and bed, house, and lighting. Whatever they give they expect
back. They see an affluent aristocrat or brahmin or householder amusing
themselves, supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual
stimulation. They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death,
I would be reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins
or householders!'[^436] They settle on that thought, stabilize it, and
develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed further, their
thought leads to rebirth there.[^437] But I say that this is only for
those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's wish of an
ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard:[^438] 'The gods of the four great kings
are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when
my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods of the four great kings!' They settle on that thought, stabilize
it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not developed
further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that this is
only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The heart's
wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins. Whatever they give they
expect back. And they've heard: 'The gods of the thirty-three ... the
gods of Yama ... the joyful gods ... the gods who love to imagine ...
the gods who control what is imagined by others are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods who
control what is imagined by others!' They settle on that thought,
stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for less and not
developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there. But I say that
this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the unethical. The
heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their purity.

Next, someone gives to ascetics or brahmins such things as food, drink,
clothing, vehicles; garlands, fragrance, and makeup; and bed, house, and
lighting. Whatever they give they expect back. And they've heard: 'The
gods of the Divinity's host are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.'
They think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be
reborn in the company of the gods of the Divinity's host!' They settle
on that thought, stabilize it, and develop it. As they've settled for
less and not developed further, their thought leads to rebirth there.
But I say that this is only for those of ethical conduct, not for the
unethical. And for those free of desire, not those with desire.[^439]
The heart's wish of an ethical person succeeds because of their freedom
from desire.[^440]

*Eight assemblies:* the assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins,
householders, and ascetics. An assembly of the gods of the four great
kings. An assembly of the gods of the thirty-three. An assembly of
Māras. An assembly of divinities.[^441]

*Eight worldly conditions:* gain and loss, fame and disgrace, blame and
praise, pleasure and pain.[^442]

*Eight dimensions of mastery:* Perceiving form internally, someone sees
forms externally, limited, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they
perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the first dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower
that's blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
fifth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak
flower that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a
cloth from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow
color and yellow appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and
see.' This is the sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
red, with red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow
flower that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally that are
white, with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning
star that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth
from Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This
is the eighth dimension of mastery.[^443]

*Eight liberations:* Having physical form, they see forms. This is the
first liberation.

Not perceiving physical form internally, they see forms externally. This
is the second liberation.

They're focused only on beauty. This is the third liberation.

Going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending of perceptions
of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity, aware that
'space is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite
space. This is the fourth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware that
'consciousness is infinite', they enter and remain in the dimension of
infinite consciousness. This is the fifth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. This is the sixth liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they enter and remain
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. This is the
seventh liberation.

Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception and
feeling. This is the eighth liberation.[^444]

These are the teachings grouped by eight that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 9. Nines

There are teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by nine?

*Nine grounds for resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to me,' you
harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing wrong to me' ... 'They will
do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong by someone I love' ... 'They are
doing wrong by someone I love' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I
love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ... 'They are helping someone
I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike,' you harbor
resentment.[^445]

*Nine methods to get rid of resentment:* Thinking: 'They did wrong to
me, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment. Thinking:
'They are doing wrong to me ...' ... 'They will do wrong to me ...' ...
'They did wrong by someone I love ...' ... 'They are doing wrong by
someone I love ...' ... 'They will do wrong by someone I love ...' ...
'They helped someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I
dislike ...' ... Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what
can I possibly do?' you get rid of resentment.

*Nine abodes of sentient beings:* There are sentient beings that are
diverse in body and diverse in perception, such as human beings, some
gods, and some beings in the underworld. This is the first abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.[^446]

*Nine lost opportunities for spiritual practice:* Firstly, a Realized
One has arisen in the world. He teaches the Dhamma leading to peace,
extinguishment, awakening, as proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person
has been reborn in hell. This is the first lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the animal realm. This is the second lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the ghost realm. This is the third lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn among the titans. This is the fourth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in one of the long-lived orders of gods. This is the fifth
lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. But a person has
been reborn in the borderlands, among uneducated foreigners, where
monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen do not go.[^447] This is the sixth
lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they have wrong view and distorted
perspective: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings.
There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife.
There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn
spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly
comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife after
realizing it with their own insight.' This is the seventh lost
opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, a Realized One has arisen in the world. And a person is
reborn in a central country. But they're witless, dull, idiotic, and
unable to distinguish what is well said from what is poorly said. This
is the eighth lost opportunity for spiritual practice.

Furthermore, no Realized One has arisen in the world, so there is no
teaching of the Dhamma leading to peace, extinguishment, awakening, as
proclaimed by the Holy One. But a person is reborn in a central country.
And they're wise, bright, clever, and able to distinguish what is well
said from what is poorly said. This is the ninth lost opportunity for
spiritual practice.[^448]

*Nine progressive meditations:* A mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. As the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected are stilled, they enter and remain in the
second absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion,
with internal clarity and mind at one, without placing the mind and
keeping it connected. And with the fading away of rapture, they enter
and remain in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. Going totally beyond perceptions
of form, with the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they enter and
remain in the dimension of infinite space. Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite',
they enter and remain in the dimension of infinite consciousness. Going
totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that
'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension of
nothingness. Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, they
enter and remain in the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception. Going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception
and feeling.[^449]

*Nine progressive cessations:* For someone who has attained the first
absorption, sensual perceptions have ceased. For someone who has
attained the second absorption, the placing of the mind and keeping it
connected have ceased. For someone who has attained the third
absorption, rapture has ceased. For someone who has attained the fourth
absorption, breathing has ceased. For someone who has attained the
dimension of infinite space, the perception of form has ceased. For
someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased. For someone
who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the perception of the
dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased. For someone who has
attained the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, the
perception of the dimension of nothingness has ceased. For someone who
has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, perception and
feeling have ceased.[^450]

These are the teachings grouped by nine that have been rightly explained
by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert.

## 10. Tens

There are teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly explained by
the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert. What are the
teachings grouped by ten?

*Ten qualities that serve as protector:* Firstly, a mendicant is
ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves well and
resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest
fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken. This is a quality that
serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. This too is a
quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. This too
is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This too is a quality
that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long
ago.[^451] This too is a quality that serves as protector.

Furthermore, a mendicant is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and
passing away which is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete
ending of suffering. This too is a quality that serves as
protector.[^452]

*Ten universal dimensions of meditation:* Someone perceives the
meditation on universal earth above, below, across, undivided and
limitless. They perceive the meditation on universal water ... the
meditation on universal fire ... the meditation on universal air ... the
meditation on universal blue ... the meditation on universal yellow ...
the meditation on universal red ... the meditation on universal white
... the meditation on universal space ... They perceive the meditation
on universal consciousness above, below, across, undivided and
limitless.[^453]

*Ten ways of doing unskillful deeds:* killing living creatures,
stealing, and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh,
or nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view.

*Ten ways of doing skillful deeds:* refraining from killing living
creatures, stealing, and sexual misconduct; refraining from speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical; contentment, good will,
and right view.

*Ten abodes of the noble ones:* A mendicant has given up five factors,
possesses six factors, has a single guard, has four supports, has
eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the truth, has totally given
up searching, has unsullied intentions, has stilled the physical
process, and is well freed in mind and well freed by wisdom.

And how has a mendicant given up five factors? It's when a mendicant has
given up sensual desire, ill will, dullness and drowsiness, restlessness
and remorse, and doubt. That's how a mendicant has given up five
factors.

And how does a mendicant possess six factors? A mendicant, seeing a
sight with their eyes, is neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous,
mindful and aware. Hearing a sound with their ears ... Smelling an odor
with their nose ... Tasting a flavor with their tongue ... Feeling a
touch with their body ... Knowing an idea with their mind, they're
neither happy nor sad. They remain equanimous, mindful and aware. That's
how a mendicant possesses six factors.

And how does a mendicant have a single guard? It's when a mendicant's
heart is guarded by mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has a single
guard.

And how does a mendicant have four supports? After appraisal, a
mendicant uses some things, endures some things, avoids some things, and
gets rid of some things. That's how a mendicant has four supports.

And how has a mendicant eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of the
truth? Different ascetics and brahmins have different idiosyncratic
interpretations of the truth. A mendicant has dispelled, eliminated,
thrown out, rejected, let go of, given up, and relinquished all these.
That's how a mendicant has eliminated idiosyncratic interpretations of
the truth.

And how has a mendicant totally given up searching? It's when they've
given up searching for sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and
for a spiritual path. That's how a mendicant has totally given up
searching.

And how does a mendicant have unsullied intentions? It's when they've
given up sensual, malicious, and cruel intentions. That's how a
mendicant has unsullied intentions.

And how has a mendicant stilled the physical process? It's when, giving
up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, they
enter and remain in the fourth absorption, without pleasure or pain,
with pure equanimity and mindfulness. That's how a mendicant has stilled
the physical process.

And how is a mendicant well freed in mind? It's when a mendicant's mind
is freed from greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant is well
freed in mind.

And how is a mendicant well freed by wisdom? It's when a mendicant
understands: 'I've given up greed, hate, and delusion, cut them off at
the root, made them like a palm stump, obliterated them, so they're
unable to arise in the future.' That's how a mendicant's mind is well
freed by wisdom.[^454]

*Ten qualities of an adept:* an adept's right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.[^455]

Reverends, these are the teachings grouped by ten that have been rightly
explained by the Buddha. You should all recite these in concert, without
disputing, so that this spiritual path may last for a long time. That
would be for the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy
for the world, for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and
humans."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable Sāriputta,
"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you've taught this
exposition of the reciting in concert."

That is what Venerable Sāriputta said, and the teacher
approved. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what Sāriputta
said.

