# Linked Discourses on Arising

## The Chapter on Arising

### N 26.1 The Eye *Cakkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
the eye is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation,
rebirth, and manifestation of the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind is
the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending
of the eye is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and
the ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of
the ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind is the cessation of suffering, the
settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and death."

### N 26.2 Sights *Rūpasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
sights is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation,
rebirth, and manifestation of sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas
is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending
of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas is the cessation
of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and
death."

### N 26.3 Consciousness *Viññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of eye consciousness ... mind consciousness ...
is the manifestation of old age and death. The cessation of eye
consciousness ... mind consciousness ... is the ending of old age and
death."

### N 26.4 Contact *Samphassasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of eye contact ... mind contact ... is the
manifestation of old age and death. The cessation of eye contact ...
mind contact ... is the ending of old age and death."

### N 26.5 Feeling *Samphassajasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of feeling born of eye contact ...

the arising of feeling born of mind contact ... is the manifestation of
old age and death. The cessation of feeling born of eye contact ... the
cessation of feeling born of mind contact ... is the ending of old age
and death."

### N 26.6 Perception *Saññāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of perception of sights ... perception of ideas
... is the manifestation of old age and death. The cessation of
perception of sights ... perception of ideas ... is the ending of old
age and death."

### N 26.7 Intention *Sañcetanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of intentions regarding sights ... intentions
regarding ideas ... is the manifestation of old age and death. The
cessation of intentions regarding sights ... intentions regarding ideas
... is the ending of old age and death."

### N 26.8 Craving *Taṇhāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising of craving for sights ... craving for ideas ...
is the manifestation of old age and death. The cessation of craving for
sights ... craving for ideas ... is the ending of old age and death."

### N 26.9 Elements *Dhātusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
the earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air element,
the space element, and the consciousness element is the arising of
suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old
age and death. The cessation of the earth element, the water element,
the fire element, the air element, the space element, and the
consciousness element is the cessation of suffering, the settling of
diseases, and the ending of old age and death."

### N 26.10 The Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
form is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation, rebirth,
and manifestation of feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness is
the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending
of form is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases, and the
ending of old age and death. The cessation, settling, and ending of
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness is the cessation of
suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and
death."



