# Linked Discourses on Absorption

## The Chapter on Absorption

### N 34.1 Entering Immersion *Samādhimūlakasamāpattisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in entering it.

One meditator is not skilled in immersion but is skilled in entering it.

One meditator is skilled neither in immersion nor in entering it.

One meditator is skilled both in immersion and in entering it.

Of these, the meditator skilled in immersion and in entering it is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the four.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these.

In the same way, the meditator skilled in immersion and entering it is
the foremost, best, leading, highest, and finest of the four."

### N 34.2 Remaining in Immersion *Samādhimūlakaṭhitisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in remaining in it.

One meditator is skilled in remaining in immersion but is not skilled in
immersion.

One meditator is skilled neither in immersion nor in remaining in it.

One meditator is skilled both in immersion and in remaining in it.

Of these, the meditator skilled in immersion and in remaining in it is
the foremost, best, leading, highest, and finest of the four.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these.

In the same way, the meditator skilled in immersion and remaining in it
is the foremost, best, leading, highest, and finest of the four."

### N 34.3 Emerging From Immersion *Samādhimūlakavuṭṭhānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in emerging from it. ..."

### N 34.4 Gladdening for Immersion *Samādhimūlakakallitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in gladdening the mind for
immersion. ..."

### N 34.5 Supports For Immersion *Samādhimūlakaārammaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in the supports for
immersion. ..."

### N 34.6 Meditation Subjects For Immersion *Samādhimūlakagocarasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in the meditation subjects
for immersion. ..."

### N 34.7 Projecting the Mind Purified by Immersion *Samādhimūlakaabhinīhārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in projecting the mind
purified by immersion. ..."

### N 34.8 Carefulness in Immersion *Samādhimūlakasakkaccakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in practicing carefully
for it. ..."

### N 34.9 Persistence in Immersion *Samādhimūlakasātaccakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in practicing persistently
for it. ..."

### N 34.10 Conducive to Immersion *Samādhimūlakasappāyakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in immersion but not in doing what's conducive
to it. ..."

### N 34.11 Entering and Remaining *Samāpattimūlakaṭhitisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in remaining in
it. ..."

### N 34.12 Entering and Emerging *Samāpattimūlakavuṭṭhānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in emerging from
it. ..."

### N 34.13 Entering and Gladdening *Samāpattimūlakakallitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in gladdening the
mind for immersion. ..."

### N 34.14 Entering and Supports *Samāpattimūlakaārammaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in the supports
for it. ..."

### N 34.15 Entering and Meditation Subjects *Samāpattimūlakagocarasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in the meditation
subjects for immersion. ..."

### N 34.16 Entering and Projecting *Samāpattimūlakaabhinīhārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in projecting the
mind purified by immersion. ..."

### N 34.17 Entering and Carefulness *Samāpattimūlakasakkaccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in practicing
carefully for it. ..."

### N 34.18 Entering and Persistence *Samāpattimūlakasātaccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in practicing
persistently for it. ..."

### N 34.19 Entering and What's Conducive *Samāpattimūlakasappāyakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in entering immersion but not in doing what's
conducive to it. ..."

### N 34.20--27 Eight on Remaining and Emergence, Etc. *Ṭhitimūlakavuṭṭhānasuttādiaṭṭhaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in remaining in immersion but not in emerging
from it. ..."

**(These eight discourses should be told in full as the previous set.)**

### N 34.28--34 Seven on Emergence and Gladdening, Etc. *Vuṭṭhānamūlakakallitasuttādisattaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in emerging from immersion but not in
gladdening the mind for immersion. ..."

**(These seven discourses should be told in full as the previous set.)**

### N 34.35--40 Six on Gladdening and Support, Etc. *Kallitamūlakaārammaṇasuttādichakka*

At Sāvatthī.

"One meditator is skilled in gladdening the mind for immersion but not
in the supports for immersion. ..."

**(These six discourses should be told in full as the previous set.)**

### N 34.41--45 Five on Support and Subjects, Etc. *Ārammaṇamūlakagocarasuttādipañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"One meditator is skilled in the supports for immersion but not in the
meditation subjects for immersion. ..."

**(These five discourses should be told in full as the previous set.)**

### N 34.46--49 Four on Subjects and Projection, Etc. *Gocaramūlakaabhinīhārasuttādicatukka*

At Sāvatthī.

"One meditator is skilled in the mindfulness meditation subjects for
immersion but not in projecting the mind purified by immersion. ..."

"One meditator is skilled in the mindfulness meditation subjects for
immersion but not in practicing carefully for it. ..."

**(These four discourses should be told in full as the previous set.)**

"One meditator is skilled in the mindfulness meditation subjects for
immersion but not in practicing persistently for it. ..."

"One meditator is skilled in the mindfulness meditation subjects for
immersion but not in doing what's conducive to it. ..."

### N 34.50--52 Three on Projection and Carefulness *Abhinīhāramūlakasakkaccasuttāditika*

At Sāvatthī.

"One meditator is skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion
but not in practicing carefully for it. ..."

"One meditator is skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion
but not in practicing persistently for it. ..."

"One meditator is skilled in projecting the mind purified by immersion
but not in doing what's conducive to it. ..."

### N 34.53--54 Two on Carefulness and Persistence *Sakkaccamūlakasātaccakārīsuttadukādi*

At Sāvatthī.

"One meditator is skilled in practicing carefully for immersion but not
in practicing persistently for it. ..."

"One meditator is skilled in practicing carefully for immersion but not
in doing what's conducive to it. ..."

### N 34.55 Persistence and What's Conducive *Sātaccamūlakasappāyakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four meditators. What four?

One meditator is skilled in practicing persistently for immersion but
not in doing what's conducive to it.

One meditator is skilled in doing what's conducive to immersion but not
in practicing persistently for it.

One meditator is skilled neither in practicing persistently for
immersion nor in doing what's conducive to it.

One meditator is skilled both in practicing persistently for immersion
and in doing what's conducive to it.

Of these, the meditator skilled both in practicing persistently for
immersion and in doing what's conducive to it is the foremost, best,
leading, highest, and finest of the four.

From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from curds come butter,
from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of ghee. And the cream
of ghee is said to be the best of these.

In the same way, the meditator skilled both in practicing persistently
for immersion and in doing what's conducive to it is the foremost, best,
leading, highest, and finest of the four."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said.

**(All should be told in full as per the fifty-fifth discourse.)**
