SUTTA 57

[^600]: MA: Punna wore horns on his head, tied a tail to his backside, and went about eating grass together with the cows. Seniya performed all the actions typical for a dog.

[^601]: It should be noted that a wrong ascetic practice has less
severe consequences when it is undertaken without wrong view than when it is accompanied by wrong view. Although few nowadays will take up the dog-duty practice, many other deviant lifestyles have become widespread, and to the extent that these are justified by a wrong view, their consequences become that much more harmful.

[^602]: Sabyābajjham் kāyasankhāram் (vacīsankhāram, manosankhārami) abhisankharoti. Here an "afflictive bodily formation" may be understood as the volition responsible for the three courses of unwholesome bodily action; an "afflictive verbal formation" as the volition responsible for the four courses of unwholesome verbal action; and an "afflictive mental formation" as the volition responsible for the three courses of unwholesome mental action. See MN 9.4.

[^603]: He is reborn in one of the states of deprivation - hell, the animal kingdom, or the realm of ghosts.

[^604]: Bhūtā bhūtassa upapatti hoti. MA: Beings are reborn through the actions they perform and in ways conforming to those actions. The implications of this thesis are explored more fully in MN 135 and MN 136.

[^605]: Here the volitions responsible for the ten courses of wholesome action, together with the volitions of the jhānas, are intended.

[^606]: He is reborn in'a heavenly world.

[^607]: Strictly speaking, no volitional action can be simultaneously both wholesome and unwholesome, for the volition responsible for the action must be either one or the other. Thus here we should understand that the being engages in a medley of wholesome and unwholesome actions, none of which is particularly dominant.

[^608]: MA: This is the volition of the four supramundane paths culminating in arahantship. Although the arahant performs deeds, his deeds no longer have any kammic potency to generate new existence or to bring forth results even in the present existence.

[^609]: MA explains that pabbajjā, the going forth, is mentioned here only in a loose figure of speech. In actual fact, he receives the going forth before the probationary period
and then lives on probation for four months before being entitled to receive upasampadā, full admission to the Sangha.

[^610]: MA: The Buddha can decide: "This person must live on probation, this one need not live on probation."

