SUTTA 81

[^790]: At the end of this sutta the Buddha will state that at that time he himself was Jotipāla. At SN 1:50/i,35-36 the deity Ghaṭikāra visits the Buddha Gotama and recalls their ancient friendship.

[^791]: This seems to have been a common pejorative expression used by the brahmin householders with reference to those who led a full-time renunciate life, contrary to their own ideal of maintaining the family lineage.

[^792]: In the East it is considered, under normal circumstances, a serious breach of etiquette for one of lower birth to touch one of superior birth on the head. MA explains that Ghatikāra was prepared to risk that breach in order to persuade Jotipāla to meet the Buddha.

[^793]: MA states that bodhisattas go forth under the Buddhas, purify their virtue, learn the Buddha's teachings, practise the meditative life, and develop insight up to conformity knowledge (anulomañāna). But they do not make effort to attain the paths and fruits (which would terminate their bodhisatta career).

[^794]: His conduct approximates as closely to that of a monk as is possible for one still leading the household life. MA explains that he does not trade in the pottery he makes but merely engages in a free exchange of services with his neighbours.

[^795]: MA explains that he refused because of his fewness of wishes (appicchatā). He realised that the king had sent the foodstuffs because he had heard the Buddha's report about his own virtues, but he thought: "I have no need of this. With what I acquire through my work I can support my parents and make offerings to the Buddha."

