# The Great Chapter

### AN 7.65 Conscience and Prudence  *Hirīottappasutta*

"Mendicants, when there is no conscience and prudence, one who lacks
conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is no conscience and prudence, a person who
lacks conscience and prudence has destroyed a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is no sense restraint, one who lacks sense
restraint has destroyed a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is no ethical conduct, one who lacks ethics has destroyed a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion, one who
lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true knowledge
and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one who lacks
true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

When there is conscience and prudence, a person who has fulfilled
conscience and prudence has fulfilled a vital condition for sense
restraint. When there is sense restraint, one who has fulfilled sense
restraint has fulfilled a vital condition for ethical conduct. When
there is ethical conduct, one who has fulfilled ethical conduct has
fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. When there is right
immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital
condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge
and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has
fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled
disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would grow to fullness.

In the same way, when there is conscience and prudence, one who has
fulfilled conscience and prudence has fulfilled a vital condition for
sense restraint. ... One who has fulfilled disillusionment and
dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of
freedom."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.66 The Seven Suns  *Sattasūriyasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, in Ambapālī's Mango Grove. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, conditions are impermanent. Conditions are unstable.
Conditions are unreliable. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Sineru, the king of mountains, is 84,000 leagues long and 84,000 leagues
wide. It sinks 84,000 leagues below the ocean and rises 84,000 leagues
above it. There comes a time when, after a very long period has
passed---many years, many hundreds, many thousands, many hundreds of
thousands of years---the heavens fail to rain. When this happens, the
plants and seeds, the herbs, grass, and big trees wither away and dry
up, and are no more. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable, so
unreliable. This is quite enough for you to become disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a second
sun appears. When this happens, the streams and pools wither away and
dry up, and are no more. So impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a third
sun appears. When this happens, the great rivers---the Ganges,
Yamunā, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---wither away and dry up, and are no more. So
impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a fourth
sun appears. When this happens, the great lakes from which the rivers
originate---the Anotattā, Sīhapapātā,
Rathakārā, Kaṇṇamuṇḍā, Kuṇālā,
Chaddantā, and Mandākinī---wither away and dry
up, and are no more. So impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a fifth
sun appears. When this happens, the water in the ocean sinks by a
hundred leagues. It sinks by two, three, four, five, six, or even seven
hundred leagues. The water that remains in the ocean is only seven palm
trees deep. It's six, five, four, three, two, or even one palm tree
deep. The water that remains in the ocean is only seven fathoms deep.
It's six, five, four, three, two, one or even half a fathom deep. It's
waist high, knee high, or even ankle high. It's like in autumn, when the
heavens rain heavily and water remains here and there in the cows'
hoofprints. In the same way, water in the ocean remains here and there
in puddles like cows' hoofprints. When the fifth sun appears there's not
even enough water left in the great ocean for the tip of the toe. So
impermanent are conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a sixth
sun appears. When this happens, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains smoke and smolder and give off fumes. It's like when a
potter's kiln is first kindled, and it smokes and smolders and gives off
fumes. In the same way, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains smoke and smolder and give off fumes. So impermanent are
conditions ...

There comes a time when, after a very long period has passed, a seventh
sun appears. When this happens, this great earth and Sineru the king of
mountains erupt in one burning mass of fire. And as they blaze and burn
the flames are swept by the wind as far as the realm of divinity. Sineru
the king of mountains blazes and burns, crumbling as it's overcome by
the great fire. And meanwhile, mountain peaks a hundred leagues high, or
two, three, four, or five hundred leagues high disintegrate as they
burn. And when the great earth and Sineru the king of mountains blaze
and burn, no soot or ash is found. It's like when ghee or oil blaze and
burn, and neither ashes nor soot are found. In the same way, when the
great earth and Sineru the king of mountains blaze and burn, no soot or
ash is found. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable are conditions,
so unreliable are conditions. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions.

Mendicants, who would ever think or believe that this earth and Sineru,
king of mountains, will burn and crumble and be no more, except for one
who has seen the truth?

Once upon a time, there was a teacher called Sunetta. He was a religious
founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had many
hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in the company
of Divinity. Those who totally understood Sunetta's teachings
were---when their body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place,
the company of Divinity. Of those who didn't totally understand
Sunetta's teachings, some---when their body broke up, after death---were
reborn in the company of the gods who control what is imagined by
others. Some were reborn in the company of the gods who love to imagine,
some with the joyful gods, some with the gods of Yama, some with the
gods of the thirty-three, and some with the gods of the four great
kings. Some were reborn in the company of well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders.

Then the teacher Sunetta thought: 'It's not proper for me to be reborn
in the next life in exactly the same place as my disciples. Why don't I
further develop love?'

Then Sunetta developed love for seven years. Having done so he did not
return to this world for seven eons of cosmic expansion and contraction.
As the cosmos contracted he went to the realm of streaming radiance. As
it expanded he was reborn in an empty mansion of divinity. There he was
the Divinity, the Great Divinity, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the
universal seer, the wielder of power. He was Sakka, lord of gods,
thirty-six times. Many hundreds of times he was a king, a wheel-turning
monarch, a just and principled king. His dominion extended to all four
sides, he achieved stability in the country, and he possessed the seven
treasures. He had over a thousand sons who were valiant and heroic,
crushing the armies of his enemies. After conquering this land girt by
sea, he reigned by principle, without rod or sword. Yet even though
Sunetta lived so long, he was not exempt from rebirth, old age, and
death. He was not exempt from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress, I say.

Why is that? Because of not understanding and not penetrating four
things. What four? Noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These
noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom have been understood and
comprehended. Craving for continued existence has been cut off; the
conduit to rebirth is ended; now there'll be no more future lives."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Ethics, immersion, and wisdom,\
> and the supreme freedom:\
> these things have been understood\
> by Gotama the renowned.
>
> And so the Buddha, having insight,\
> explained this teaching to the mendicants.\
> The Teacher has made an end of suffering;\
> seeing clearly, he is quenched."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.67 The Simile of the Citadel  *Nagaropamasutta*

"Mendicants, when a king's frontier citadel is well provided with seven
essentials and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without
trouble or difficulty, it is then called a king's frontier citadel that
cannot be overrun by external foes and enemies.

With what seven essentials is a citadel well provided?

Firstly, a citadel has a pillar with deep foundations, firmly embedded,
imperturbable and unshakable. This is the first essential with which a
king's frontier citadel is well provided, to defend those within and
repel those outside.

Furthermore, a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide. This is the
second essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide. This is
the third essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and
hand-held. This is the fourth essential ...

Furthermore, many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel, such as
elephant riders, cavalry, charioteers, archers, bannermen, adjutants,
food servers, warrior-chiefs, princes, chargers, great warriors, heroes,
leather-clad soldiers, and sons of bondservants. This is the fifth
essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
intelligent. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in. This is
the sixth essential ...

Furthermore, a citadel has a wall that's high and wide, covered with
plaster. This is the seventh essential with which a king's frontier
citadel is well provided, to defend those within and repel those
outside.

With these seven essentials a citadel is well provided.

What are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without
trouble or difficulty?

Firstly, a king's frontier citadel has much hay, wood, and water stored
up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of those within and to repel
those outside.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored
up for those within.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much food such as sesame,
green gram, and black gram stored up for those within.

Furthermore, a king's frontier citadel has much medicine---ghee, butter,
oil, honey, molasses, and salt---stored up for the enjoyment, relief,
and comfort of those within and to repel those outside.

These are the four kinds of sustenance it gets when needed, without
trouble or difficulty.

When a king's frontier citadel is well provided with seven essentials
and gets four kinds of sustenance when needed, without trouble or
difficulty, it is then called a king's frontier citadel that cannot be
overrun by external foes and enemies. In the same way, when a noble
disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they are
then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra,
who cannot be overrun by the Wicked One. What are the seven good
qualities that they have?

Just as a king's frontier citadel has a pillar with deep foundations,
firmly embedded, imperturbable and unshakable, to defend those within
and repel those outside, in the same way a noble disciple has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' A noble disciple with faith as their
pillar gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up
the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves
pure. This is the first good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a moat that is deep and wide, in the same way a
noble disciple has a conscience. They're conscientious about bad conduct
by way of body, speech, and mind, and conscientious about having any
bad, unskillful qualities. A noble disciple with a conscience as their
moat gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the
blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure.
This is the second good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a patrol path that is high and wide, in the same
way a noble disciple is prudent. They're prudent when it comes to bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and prudent when it comes to
acquiring any bad, unskillful qualities. A noble disciple with prudence
as their patrol path gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful,
they give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep
themselves pure. This is the third good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has stores of many weapons, both projectile and
hand-held, in the same way a noble disciple is very learned. They
remember and keep what they've learned. These teachings are good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice that's entirely full and
pure. They are very learned in such teachings, remembering them,
reciting them, mentally scrutinizing them, and comprehending them
theoretically. A noble disciple with learning as their weapon gives up
the unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy
and develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the
fourth good quality they have.

Just as many kinds of armed forces reside in a citadel ... in the same
way a noble disciple is energetic. They live with energy roused up for
giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They
are strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to
developing skillful qualities. A noble disciple with energy as their
armed forces gives up the unskillful and develops the skillful, they
give up the blameworthy and develop the blameless, and they keep
themselves pure. This is the fifth good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
intelligent, who keeps strangers out and lets known people in, in the
same way a noble disciple is mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and
alertness, and can remember and recall what was said and done long ago.
A noble disciple with mindfulness as their gatekeeper gives up the
unskillful and develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and
develop the blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the sixth
good quality they have.

Just as a citadel has a wall that's high and wide, covered with plaster,
to defend those within and repel those outside, in the same way a noble
disciple is wise. They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which
is noble, penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. A
noble disciple with wisdom as their wall gives up the unskillful and
develops the skillful, they give up the blameworthy and develop the
blameless, and they keep themselves pure. This is the seventh good
quality they have. These are the seven good qualities that they have.

And what are the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life
that belong to the higher mind---that they get when they want, without
trouble or difficulty? Just as a king's frontier citadel has much hay,
wood, and water stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and comfort of
those within and to repel those outside, in the same way a noble
disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and
keeping it connected. This is for their own enjoyment, relief, and
comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much rice and barley stored up, in
the same way, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a noble disciple enters and remains in the second absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity
and mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. This
is for their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon
extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much food such as sesame, green
gram, and black gram stored up, in the same way with the fading away of
rapture, a noble disciple enters and remains in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' This is for their own enjoyment,
relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon extinguishment.

Just as a king's frontier citadel has much medicine---ghee, butter, oil,
honey, molasses, and salt---stored up for the enjoyment, relief, and
comfort of those within and to repel those outside, in the same way,
giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and sadness, a
noble disciple enters and remains in the fourth absorption, without
pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. This is for
their own enjoyment, relief, and comfort, and for alighting upon
extinguishment. These are the four absorptions---blissful meditations in
this life that belong to the higher mind---which they get when they
want, without trouble or difficulty.

When a noble disciple has seven good qualities, and they get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty, they are
then called a noble disciple who cannot be overrun by Māra,
who cannot be overrun by the Wicked One."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.68 One Who Knows the Teachings  *Dhammaññūsutta*

"A mendicant with seven qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world. What seven? It's when a mendicant knows the teachings, knows
the meaning, has self-knowledge, knows moderation, knows the right time,
knows assemblies, and knows people high and low.

And how is a mendicant one who knows the teachings? It's when a
mendicant knows the teachings: statements, mixed prose & verse,
discussions, verses, inspired exclamations, legends, stories of past
lives, amazing stories, and elaborations. If a mendicant did not know
these teachings, they would not be called 'one who knows the teachings'.
But because they do know these teachings, they are called 'one who knows
the teachings'. Such is the one who knows the teachings.

And how are they one who knows the meaning? It's when a mendicant knows
the meaning of this or that statement: 'This is what that statement
means; that is what this statement means.' If a mendicant did not know
the meaning of this or that statement, they would not be called 'one who
knows the meaning'. But because they do know the meaning of this or that
statement, they are called 'one who knows the meaning'. Such is the one
who knows the teachings and the one who knows the meaning.

And how are they one who has self-knowledge? It's when a mendicant has
self-knowledge: 'This is the extent of my faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, wisdom, and eloquence.' If a mendicant did not have
self-knowledge, they would not be called 'one who has self-knowledge'.
But because they do have self-knowledge, they are called 'one who has
self-knowledge'. Such is the one who knows the teachings, the one who
knows the meaning, and the one who has self-knowledge.

And how are they one who knows moderation? It's when a mendicant knows
moderation when receiving robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. If a mendicant did not know moderation, they
would not be called 'one who knows moderation'. But because they do know
moderation, they are called 'one who knows moderation'. Such is the one
who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has
self-knowledge, and the one who knows moderation.

And how are they one who knows the right time? It's when a mendicant
knows the right time: 'This is the time for recitation; this is the time
for questioning; this is the time for meditation; this is the time for
retreat.' If a mendicant did not know the right time, they would not be
called 'one who knows the right time'. But because they do know the
right time, they are called 'one who knows the right time'. Such is the
one who knows the teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who
has self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, and the one who knows
the right time.

And how are they one who knows assemblies? It's when a mendicant knows
assemblies: 'This is an assembly of aristocrats, of brahmins, of
householders, or of ascetics. This one should be approached in this way.
This is how to stand, to act, to sit, to speak, or to stay silent when
there.' If a mendicant did not know assemblies, they would not be called
'one who knows assemblies'. But because they do know assemblies, they
are called 'one who knows assemblies'. Such is the one who knows the
teachings, the one who knows the meaning, the one who has
self-knowledge, the one who knows moderation, the one who knows the
right time, and the one who knows assemblies.

And how are they one who knows people high and low? It's when a
mendicant understands people in terms of pairs. Two people: one likes to
see the noble ones, one does not. The person who doesn't like to see the
noble ones is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does like to
see the noble ones is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people like to see the noble ones: one likes to hear the true
teaching, one does not. The person who doesn't like to hear the true
teaching is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does like to
hear the true teaching is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people like to hear the true teaching: one actively listens to the
teaching, one does not. The person who doesn't actively listen to the
teaching is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does actively
listen to the teaching is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people actively listen to the teaching: one remembers the teaching
they've heard, one does not. The person who doesn't remember the
teaching they've heard is reprehensible in that respect. The person who
does remember the teaching they've heard is praiseworthy in that
respect.

Two people remember the teaching they've heard: one reflects on the
meaning of the teachings they have remembered, one does not. The person
who does not reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have
remembered is reprehensible in that respect. The person who does reflect
on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered is praiseworthy in
that respect.

Two people reflect on the meaning of the teachings they have remembered:
one understands the meaning and the teaching and practices accordingly,
one understands the meaning and the teaching but does not practice
accordingly. The person who understands the meaning and the teaching but
does not practice accordingly is reprehensible in that respect. The
person who understands the meaning and the teaching and practices
accordingly is praiseworthy in that respect.

Two people understand the meaning and the teaching and practice
accordingly: one practices to benefit themselves but not others, and one
practices to benefit both themselves and others. The person who
practices to benefit themselves but not others is reprehensible in that
respect. The person who practices to benefit both themselves and others
is praiseworthy in that respect.

That's how a mendicant understands people in terms of pairs.

That's how a mendicant is one who knows people high and low. A mendicant
with these seven qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.69 The Shady Orchid Tree  *Pāricchattakasutta*

"Mendicants, when the leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree belonging to the
gods of the thirty-three turn brown, the gods are elated. They think:
'Now the leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree have turned brown! It won't be
long until they fall.'

When the leaves have fallen, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the
leaves on the Shady Orchid Tree have fallen. It won't be long until its
foliage starts to regrow.'

When the foliage starts to regrow, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now
the foliage of the Shady Orchid Tree has started to regrow. It won't be
long until it's ready to grow flowers and leaves separately.'

When it's ready to grow flowers and leaves separately, the gods are
elated. They think: 'Now the Shady Orchid Tree is ready to grow flowers
and leaves separately. It won't be long until buds start to form.'

When the buds start to form, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the
buds of the Shady Orchid Tree have started to form. It won't be long
until the buds burst.'

When the buds have burst, the gods are elated. They think: 'Now the buds
of the Shady Orchid Tree have burst. It won't be long until it fully
blossoms.'

When the Shady Orchid Tree of the gods of the thirty-three has fully
blossomed, the gods are elated. For four heavenly months they amused
themselves at the root of the tree, supplied and provided with the five
kinds of sensual stimulation. When the Shady Orchid Tree has fully
blossomed, its radiance spreads for fifty leagues, while its fragrance
wafts for a hundred leagues. Such is the majesty of the Shady Orchid
Tree.

In the same way, when a noble disciple plans to go forth from the lay
life to homelessness, they're like the Shady Orchid Tree when its leaves
turn brown.

When a noble disciple shaves off their hair and beard, dresses in ocher
robes, and goes forth from the lay life to homelessness, they're like
the Shady Orchid Tree when its leaves fall.

When a noble disciple, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected, they're like the Shady Orchid Tree when
its foliage starts to regrow.

When, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a
noble disciple enters and remains in the second absorption, which has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected, they're like
the Shady Orchid Tree when it's ready to grow flowers and leaves
separately.

When, with the fading away of rapture, a noble disciple enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss', they're
like the Shady Orchid Tree when its buds start to form.

When, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness and
sadness, a noble disciple enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness, they're
like the Shady Orchid Tree when its buds burst.

When a noble disciple realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and they live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements, they're like
the Shady Orchid tree when it fully blossoms.

At that time the earth gods raise the cry: 'This venerable named
so-and-so, from such-and-such village or town, the protégé of the
venerable named so-and-so, went forth from the lay life to homelessness.
They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.'

Hearing the cry of the earth gods, the gods of the four great kings ...
the gods of the thirty-three ... the gods of Yama ... the joyful gods
... the gods who love to imagine ... the gods who control what is
imagined by others ... the gods of the Divinity's host raise the cry:
'This venerable named so-and-so, from such-and-such village or town, the
protégé of the venerable named so-and-so, went forth from the lay life
to homelessness. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.' And so at that
moment, that hour, the cry soars up to the realm of divinity. Such is
the majesty of a mendicant who has ended the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.70 Honor  *Sakkaccasutta*

Then as Venerable Sāriputta was in private retreat this
thought came to his mind, "What should a mendicant honor and respect and
rely on, to give up the unskillful and develop the skillful?"

Then he thought, "A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on the
Teacher ... the teaching ... the Saṅgha ... the training
... immersion ... diligence ... A mendicant should honor and respect and
rely on hospitality, to give up the unskillful and develop the
skillful."

Then he thought, "These qualities are pure and bright in me. Why don't I
go and tell them to the Buddha? Then these qualities will not only be
purified in me, but will be better known as purified. Suppose a man were
to acquire a gold ingot, pure and bright. They'd think, 'My gold ingot
is pure and bright. Why don't I take it to show the smiths? Then it will
not only be purified, but will be better known as purified.' In the same
way, these qualities are pure and bright in me. Why don't I go and tell
them to the Buddha? Then these qualities will not only be purified in
me, but will be better known as purified."

Then in the late afternoon, Sāriputta came out of retreat
and went to the Buddha. He bowed, sat down to one side, and told the
Buddha of his thoughts while on retreat.

"Good, good, Sāriputta! A mendicant should honor and
respect and rely on the Teacher, to give up the unskillful and develop
the skillful. A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on the
teaching ... the Saṅgha ... the training ... immersion ...
diligence ... A mendicant should honor and respect and rely on
hospitality, to give up the unskillful and develop the skillful."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to the Buddha:

"Sir, this is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's
brief statement. It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't
respect the Teacher to respect the teaching. A mendicant who disrespects
the Teacher disrespects the teaching.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher
and the teaching to respect the Saṅgha. A mendicant who
disrespects the Teacher and the teaching disrespects the
Saṅgha.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, and the Saṅgha to respect the training. A
mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, and the
Saṅgha disrespects the training.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, and the training to respect
immersion. A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, and the training disrespects immersion.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion to
respect diligence. A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the
teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion
disrespects diligence.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher,
the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and
diligence to respect hospitality. A mendicant who disrespects the
Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, immersion,
and diligence disrespects hospitality.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
disrespect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence respects
hospitality.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who respects the Teacher to respect
the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence respects
hospitality.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! It's good that you understand the
detailed meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who doesn't respect the Teacher
to respect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who disrespects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence disrespects
hospitality.

It is quite impossible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
disrespect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence respects
hospitality.

It's quite possible for a mendicant who does respect the Teacher to
respect the teaching. ...

A mendicant who respects the Teacher, the teaching, the
Saṅgha, the training, immersion, and diligence respects
hospitality.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.71 Committed to Development  *Bhāvanāsutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they
might wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they're
undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. But she
had not properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if
that chicken might wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the
eggshell with their claws and beak and hatch safely!' Still they can't
break out and hatch safely. Why is that? Because she has not properly
sat on them to keep them warm and incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they
might wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they're
undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the
five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the
noble eightfold path.

When a mendicant is committed to development, they might not wish: 'If
only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!' Even so,
their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. Why is that? You
should say: 'It's because they are developed.' Developed in what? The
four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four
bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven
awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she
properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. Even if that
chicken doesn't wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell
with their claws and beak and hatch safely!' Still they can break out
and hatch safely. Why is that? Because she properly sat on them to keep
them warm and incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they
might not wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they are
developed.' Developed in what? The four kinds of mindfulness meditation,
the four right efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five
faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble
eightfold path.

Suppose a carpenter or their apprentice sees the marks of his fingers
and thumb on the handle of his adze. They don't know how much of the
handle was worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much previously.
They just know what has been worn away. In the same way, when a
mendicant is committed to development, they don't know how much of the
defilements were worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much
previously. They just know what has been worn away.

Suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with ropes. For six
months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold season it was
hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by wind and sun.
When the clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would readily collapse
and rot away. In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to
development their fetters readily collapse and rot away."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.72 The Simile of the Great Mass of Fire  *Aggikkhandhopamasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants.

While walking along the road, at a certain spot he saw a great mass of
fire burning, blazing, and glowing. Seeing this he left the road, sat at
the root of a tree on a seat spread out, and addressed the mendicants,
"Mendicants, do you see that great mass of fire burning, blazing, and
glowing?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to sit or lie down
embracing that great mass of fire? Or to sit or lie down embracing a
girl of the aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender
hands and feet?"

"Sir, it would be much better to sit or lie down embracing a girl of the
aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and
feet. For it would be painful to sit or lie down embracing that great
mass of fire."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man---of bad qualities, filthy, with
suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic or spiritual
practitioner, though claiming to be one, rotten inside, festering, and
depraved---to sit or lie down embracing that great mass of fire. Why is
that? Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his
body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

But when such an unethical man sits or lies down embracing a girl of the
aristocrats or brahmins or householders with soft and tender hands and
feet, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks
up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
twist a tough horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it so that
it cuts through your outer skin, your inner skin, your flesh, sinews,
and bones, until it reaches your marrow and keeps pushing? Or to consent
to well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders bowing down to
you?"

"Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders bowing down. For it would be painful to have a
strong man twist a tough horse-hair rope around your shins and tighten
it so that it cut through the outer skin until it reached the marrow and
kept pushing."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man twist a tough
horse-hair rope around both shins and tighten it until it reached the
marrow and kept pushing. Why is that? Because that might result in death
or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not
cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders bowing down, that brings him lasting harm
and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled sword? Or to consent to
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering you with
joined palms?"

"Sir, it would be much better to consent to well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders revering you with joined palms. For it would be
painful to have a strong man stab you in the chest with a sharp, oiled
sword."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man stab him in the chest
with a sharp, oiled sword. Why is that? Because that might result in
death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would
not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell. But when such an unethical man consents to well-to-do
aristocrats or brahmins or householders revering him with joined palms,
that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up,
after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing?
Or to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of a robe given in faith
by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be
painful to have a strong man wrap you up in a red-hot sheet of iron,
burning, blazing, and glowing."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man wrap him up in a
red-hot sheet of iron, burning, blazing, and glowing. Why is that?
Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body
breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place
of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an unethical
man enjoys the use of a robe given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or
brahmins or householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering.
When his body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
force your mouth open with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot
copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that burns your lips, mouth,
tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out below dragging your
entrails? Or to enjoy almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats
or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy almsfood given in faith by
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it would be
painful to have a strong man force your mouth open with a hot iron spike
and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning, blazing, and glowing, that
burns your lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and stomach before coming out
below dragging your entrails."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man force his mouth open
with a hot iron spike and shove in a red-hot copper ball, burning,
blazing, and glowing, that burns his lips, mouth, tongue, throat, and
stomach before coming out below with his entrails. Why is that? Because
that might result in death or deadly pain. But when his body breaks up,
after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an unethical man enjoys
almsfood given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or
householders, that brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body
breaks up, after death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the
underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
grab you by the head or shoulders and make you sit or lie down on
red-hot iron bed or seat? Or to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of beds and chairs given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it
would be painful to have a strong man grab you by the head or shoulders
and make you sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him by the head
or shoulders and make him sit or lie down on a red-hot iron bed or seat.
Why is that? Because that might result in death or deadly pain. But when
his body breaks up, after death, it would not cause him to be reborn in
a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. But when such an
unethical man enjoys the use of beds and seats given in faith by
well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that brings him
lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after death, he's
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is better---to have a strong man
grab you, turn you upside down, and shove you in a red-hot copper pot,
burning, blazing, and glowing, where you're seared in boiling scum, and
swept up and down and round and round. Or to enjoy the use of dwellings
given in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders?"

"Sir, it would be much better to enjoy the use of dwellings given in
faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders. For it
would be painful to have a strong man grab you, turn you upside down,
and shove you in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing, and glowing,
where you're seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down and round and
round."

"I declare this to you, mendicants, I announce this to you! It would be
better for that unethical man to have a strong man grab him, turn him
upside down, and shove him in a red-hot copper pot, burning, blazing,
and glowing, where he's seared in boiling scum, and swept up and down
and round and round. Why is that? Because that might result in death or
deadly pain. But when his body breaks up, after death, it would not
cause him to be reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. But when such an unethical man enjoys the use of dwellings given
in faith by well-to-do aristocrats or brahmins or householders, that
brings him lasting harm and suffering. When his body breaks up, after
death, he's reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell.

So you should train like this: 'Our use of robes, almsfood, lodgings,
and medicines and supplies for the sick shall be of great fruit and
benefit for those who offered them. And our going forth will not be
wasted, but will be fruitful and fertile.' That's how you should train.
Considering what is good for yourself, mendicants, is quite enough for
you to persist with diligence. Considering what is good for others is
quite enough for you to persist with diligence. Considering what is good
for both is quite enough for you to persist with diligence."

That is what the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken,
sixty monks spewed hot blood from their mouths. Sixty mendicants
resigned the training and returned to a lesser life, saying:

"It's too hard, Blessed One! It's just too hard!" And sixty monks were
freed from defilements by not grasping.

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.73 About Sunetta  *Sunettasutta*

"Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a Teacher called Sunetta. He
was a religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He
had many hundreds of disciples. He taught them the path to rebirth in
the company of Divinity. Those lacking confidence in Sunetta were---when
their body broke up, after death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell. Those full of confidence in Sunetta
were---when their body broke up, after death---reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.

Once upon a time there was a teacher called Mūgapakkha ...
Aranemi ... Kuddālaka ... Hatthipāla ...
Jotipāla ... Araka. He was a religious founder and was free
of desire for sensual pleasures. He had many hundreds of disciples. He
taught them the way to rebirth in the company of Divinity. Those lacking
confidence in Araka were---when their body broke up, after
death---reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.
Those full of confidence in Araka were---when their body broke up, after
death---reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.

What do you think, mendicants? If someone with malicious intent were to
abuse and insult these seven teachers with their hundreds of followers,
would they not create much wickedness?"

"Yes, sir."

"They would indeed. But someone who abuses and insults a single person
accomplished in view with malicious intent creates even more wickedness.
Why is that? I say that any injury done by those outside of the Buddhist
community does not compare with what is done to one's own spiritual
companions.

So you should train like this: 'We will have no malicious intent for our
spiritual companions.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.74 About Araka  *Arakasutta*

"Once upon a time, mendicants, there was a Teacher called Araka. He was
a religious founder and was free of desire for sensual pleasures. He had
many hundreds of disciples, and he taught them like this: 'Brahmins,
life as a human is short, brief, and fleeting, full of suffering and
distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the
spiritual life, for no-one born can escape death.

It's like a drop of dew on a grass tip. When the sun comes up it quickly
evaporates and doesn't last long. In the same way, life as a human is
like a dewdrop. It's brief and fleeting, full of suffering and distress.
Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the spiritual life,
for no-one born can escape death.

It's like when the heavens rain heavily. The bubbles quickly vanish and
don't last long. In the same way, life as a human is like a bubble. ...

It's like a line drawn in water. It vanishes quickly and doesn't last
long. In the same way, life as a human is like a line drawn in water.
...

It's like a mountain river traveling far, flowing fast, carrying all
before it. It doesn't turn back---not for a moment, a second, an
hour---but runs, rolls, and flows on. In the same way, life as a human
is like a mountain river. ...

It's like a strong man who has formed a glob of spit on the tip of his
tongue. He could easily spit it out. In the same way, life as a human is
like a glob of spit. ...

Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had been heated all day. If you
tossed a scrap of meat in, it would quickly vanish and not last long. In
the same way, life as a human is like a scrap of meat. ...

It's like a cow being led to the slaughterhouse. With every step she
comes closer to the slaughter, closer to death. In the same way, life as
a human is like a cow being slaughtered. It's brief and fleeting, full
of suffering and distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and
lead the spiritual life, for no-one born can escape death.'

Now, mendicants, at that time human beings had a lifespan of 60,000
years. Girls could be married at 500 years of age. And human beings only
had six afflictions: cold, heat, hunger, thirst, and the need to
defecate and urinate. But even though humans were so long-lived with so
few afflictions, Araka still taught in this way: 'Life as a human is
short, brief, and fleeting, full of suffering and distress. Be
thoughtful and wake up! Do what's good and lead the spiritual life, for
no-one born can escape death.'

These days it'd be right to say: 'Life as a human is short, brief, and
fleeting, full of suffering and distress. Be thoughtful and wake up! Do
what's good and lead the spiritual life, for no-one born can escape
death.' For these days a long life is a hundred years or a little more.
Living for a hundred years, there are just three hundred seasons, a
hundred each of the winter, summer, and rains. Living for three hundred
seasons, there are just twelve hundred months, four hundred in each of
the winter, summer, and rains. Living for twelve hundred months, there
are just twenty-four hundred fortnights, eight hundred in each of the
winter, summer, and rains. Living for 2,400 fortnights, there are just
36,000 days, 12,000 in each of the summer, winter, and rains. Living for
36,000 days, you just eat 72,000 meals, 24,000 in each of the summer,
winter, and rains, including when you're suckling at the breast, and
when you're prevented from eating.

Things that prevent you from eating include anger, pain, sickness,
sabbath, or being unable to get food. So mendicants, for a human being
with a hundred years lifespan I have counted the lifespan, the limit of
the lifespan, the seasons, the years, the months, the fortnights, the
nights, the days, the meals, and the things that prevent them from
eating. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants
what's best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here
are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be
negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

