# The Chapter on Tendencies

### AN 7.11 Underlying Tendencies (1st)  *Paṭhamaanusayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven underlying tendencies. What seven?
The underlying tendencies of sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt,
conceit, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. These are the seven
underlying tendencies."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.12 Underlying Tendencies (2nd)  *Dutiyaanusayasutta*

"Mendicants, the spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
seven underlying tendencies. What seven? The underlying tendencies of
sensual desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn,
and ignorance. The spiritual life is lived to give up and cut out these
seven underlying tendencies.

When a mendicant has given up the underlying tendencies of sensual
desire, repulsion, views, doubt, conceit, desire to be reborn, and
ignorance---cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump,
obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future---they're
called a mendicant who has cut off craving, untied the fetters, and by
rightly comprehending conceit has made an end of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.13 A Family  *Kulasutta*

"Mendicants, visiting a family with seven factors is not worthwhile, or
if you've already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile. What seven?
They don't politely rise, bow, or offer a seat. They hide what they
have. Even when they have much they give little. Even when they have
fine things they give coarse things. They give carelessly, not
carefully. Visiting a family with these seven factors is not worthwhile,
or if you've already arrived, sitting down is not worthwhile.

Visiting a family with seven factors is worthwhile, or if you've already
arrived, sitting down is worthwhile. What seven? They politely rise,
bow, and offer a seat. They don't hide what they have. When they have
much they give much. When they have refined things they give refined
things. They give carefully, not carelessly. Visiting a family with
these seven factors is worthwhile, or if you've already arrived, sitting
down is worthwhile."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.14 Persons  *Puggalasutta*

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven? The one freed both ways, the one freed by wisdom, the
direct witness, the one attained to view, the one freed by faith, the
follower of teachings, and the follower by faith. These are the seven
people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of
hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of greeting with
joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.15 A Simile With Water  *Udakūpamāsutta*

"Mendicants, these seven people found in the world are like those in
water.

What seven? One person sinks under once and stays under. One person
rises up then sinks under. One person rises up then stays put. One
person rises up then sees and discerns. One person rises up then crosses
over. One person rises up then finds a footing. One person has risen up,
crossed over, and gone beyond, and that brahmin stands on the shore.

And what kind of person sinks under once and stays under? It's the kind
of person who has exclusively dark, unskillful qualities. This kind of
person sinks under once and stays under.

And what kind of person rises up then sinks under? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' However
their faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom don't last or
grow, but dwindle away. This kind of person rises up then sinks under.

And what kind of person rises up then stays put? It's the kind of person
who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience, prudence,
energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' And their faith,
conscience, prudence, energy, and wisdom lasts, neither dwindling nor
growing. This kind of person rises up then stays put.

And what kind of person rises up then sees and discerns? It's the kind
of person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of three fetters they're a stream-enterer, not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening. This kind of person rises
up then sees and discerns.

And what kind of person rises up then crosses over? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion,
they're a once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then
make an end of suffering. This kind of person rises up then crosses
over.

And what kind of person rises up then finds a footing? It's the kind of
person who, rising up, thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience,
prudence, energy, and wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' With the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
kind of person rises up then finds a footing.

And what kind of person has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a
brahmin who stands on the shore? It's the kind of person who, rising up,
thinks: 'It's good to have faith, conscience, prudence, energy, and
wisdom regarding skillful qualities.' They realize the undefiled freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This kind of person has risen up, crossed over, and gone beyond, a
brahmin who stands on the shore.

These seven people found in the world are like those in water."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.16 Observing Impermanence  *Aniccānupassīsutta*

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven?

First, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. They perceive impermanence and experience impermanence.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
first person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. Their defilements and their life come to an end at exactly
the same time. This is the second person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing impermanence in all
conditions. With the ending of the five lower fetters they're
extinguished between one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.17 Observing Suffering  *Dukkhānupassīsutta*

"Mendicants, these seven people are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world. What seven? First, take a person who meditates observing
suffering in all conditions. They perceive suffering and experience
suffering. Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply
the mind and fathom with wisdom. ..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.18 Observing Not-self  *Anattānupassīsutta*

"First, take a person who meditates observing not-self in all things.
They perceive not-self and experience not-self. Constantly, continually,
and without interruption, they apply the mind and fathom with wisdom.
..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.19 Extinguishment  *Nibbānasutta*

"First, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. They've realized the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is the
first person worthy of offerings.

Next, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom. Their defilements and their life come to an end
at exactly the same time. This is the second person.

Next, take a person who meditates observing the happiness in
extinguishment. They perceive happiness and experience happiness.
Constantly, continually, and without interruption, they apply the mind
and fathom with wisdom.

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished between
one life and the next. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished upon
landing. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished without
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they're extinguished with
extra effort. ...

With the ending of the five lower fetters they head upstream, going to
the Akaniṭṭha realm. This is the seventh person.

These are the seven people who are worthy of offerings dedicated to the
gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and are the supreme field of merit for the
world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 7.20 Qualifications for Graduation  *Niddasavatthusutta*

"Mendicants, there are these seven qualifications for graduation. What
seven? It's when a mendicant has a keen enthusiasm to undertake the
training ... to examine the teachings ... to get rid of desires ... for
retreat ... to rouse up energy ... for mindfulness and alertness ... to
penetrate theoretically. And they don't lose these desires in the
future. These are the seven qualifications for graduation."

