# The Chapter on Pairs

### AN 8.71 Inspiring All Around (1st)  *Paṭhamasaddhāsutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant is faithful but not ethical. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful and ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and
ethical, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned?' When the mendicant is faithful,
ethical, and learned, they're complete in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful, ethical, and learned, but not a Dhamma speaker.
... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach Dhamma to the
assembly with assurance ... they don't get the four
absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that belong to the
higher mind---when they want, without trouble or difficulty ... they
don't realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements. So they're incomplete in that respect, and
should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful, ethical, and
learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who frequents assemblies, one who teaches
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance, one who gets the four absorptions
when they want, and one who lives having realized the ending of
defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the four absorptions when they want, and one who
lives having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in
that respect. A mendicant who has these eight qualities is impressive
all around, and is complete in every respect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.72 Inspiring All Around (2nd)  *Dutiyasaddhāsutta*

"A mendicant is faithful, but not ethical. So they're incomplete in that
respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I become faithful and
ethical?' When the mendicant is faithful and ethical, they're complete
in that respect.

A mendicant is faithful and ethical, but not learned. ... they're not a
Dhamma speaker ... they don't frequent assemblies ... they don't teach
Dhamma to the assembly with assurance ... they don't have direct
meditative experience of the peaceful liberations that are formless,
transcending form ... they don't realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with their own insight due to the ending of defilements. So they're
incomplete in that respect, and should fulfill it, thinking: 'How can I
become faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements?'

When they're faithful, ethical, and learned, a Dhamma speaker, one who
frequents assemblies, one who teaches Dhamma to the assembly with
assurance, one who gets the formless liberations, and one who lives
having realized the ending of defilements, they're complete in that
respect. A mendicant who has these eight qualities is impressive all
around, and is complete in every respect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.73 Mindfulness of Death (1st)  *Paṭhamamaraṇassatisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's
very fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and
ends in freedom from death. But do you develop mindfulness of death?"

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Sir, I
develop mindfulness of death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day and
night, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve
a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for another day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live for half a day, I'd
focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a lot.'
That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat a single almsmeal, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to eat half an almsmeal, I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I
could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to chew and swallow a single mouthful, I'd focus on the Buddha's
instructions and I could really achieve a lot.' That's how I develop
mindfulness of death."

Another mendicant said to the Buddha, "Sir, I too develop mindfulness of
death."

"But mendicant, how do you develop it?"

"In this case, sir, I think: 'Oh, if I'd only live as long as it takes
to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in after breathing out,
I'd focus on the Buddha's instructions and I could really achieve a
lot.' That's how I develop mindfulness of death."

When this was said, the Buddha said to those mendicants:

"The mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to live for
a day and night ... or to live for a day ... or to live for half a day
... or to live as long as it takes to eat a meal of almsfood ... or to
live as long as it takes to eat half a meal of almsfood ... or to live
as long as it takes to chew and swallow four or five mouthfuls ... These
are called mendicants who live negligently. They slackly develop
mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.

But the mendicants who develop mindfulness of death by wishing to live
as long as it takes to chew and swallow a single mouthful ... or to live
as long as it takes to breathe out after breathing in, or to breathe in
after breathing out ... These are called mendicants who live diligently.
They keenly develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.

So you should train like this: 'We will live diligently. We will keenly
develop mindfulness of death for the ending of defilements.' That's how
you should train."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.74 Mindfulness of Death (2nd)  *Dutiyamaraṇassatisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, when
mindfulness of death is developed and cultivated it's very fruitful and
beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in freedom from
death.

And how is mindfulness of death developed and cultivated to be very
fruitful and beneficial, to culminate in freedom from death and end in
freedom from death? As day passes by and night draws close, a mendicant
reflects: 'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a
scorpion or centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would
be an obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get
food poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing
winds. Or I might be attacked by humans or non-humans. And if I died
from that it would be an obstacle to my progress.' That mendicant should
reflect: 'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given
up, which might be an obstacle to my progress if I die tonight?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness.

Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.

Or else, as night passes by and day draws close, a mendicant reflects:
'I might die of many causes. A snake might bite me, or a scorpion or
centipede might sting me. And if I died from that it would be an
obstacle to my progress. Or I might stumble off a cliff, or get food
poisoning, or suffer a disturbance of bile, phlegm, or piercing winds.
Or I might be attacked by humans or non-humans. And if I died from that
it would be an obstacle to my progress.' That mendicant should reflect:
'Are there any bad, unskillful qualities that I haven't given up, which
might be an obstacle to my progress if I die today?'

Suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are such bad,
unskillful qualities. Then in order to give them up they should apply
intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance, mindfulness, and
situational awareness.

Suppose your clothes or head were on fire. In order to extinguish it,
you'd apply intense enthusiasm, effort, zeal, vigor, perseverance,
mindfulness, and situational awareness. In the same way, in order to
give up those bad, unskillful qualities, that mendicant should apply
intense enthusiasm ...

But suppose that, upon checking, a mendicant knows that there are no
such bad, unskillful qualities. Then that mendicant should meditate with
rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.
Mindfulness of death, when developed and cultivated in this way, is very
fruitful and beneficial. It culminates in freedom from death and ends in
freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.75 Accomplishments (1st)  *Paṭhamasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight accomplishments. What eight?
Accomplishment in initiative, protection, good friendship, and balanced
finances. And accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.
These are the eight accomplishments.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in lives to come.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.76 Accomplishments (2nd)  *Dutiyasampadāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these eight accomplishments. What eight?
Accomplishment in initiative, protection, good friendship, and balanced
finances. And accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom.

And what is accomplishment in initiative? It's when a gentleman earns a
living by means such as farming, trade, raising cattle, archery,
government service, or one of the professions. He understands how to go
about these things in order to complete and organize the work. This is
called accomplishment in initiative.

And what is accomplishment in protection? It's when a gentleman owns
legitimate wealth that he has earned by his own efforts and initiative,
built up with his own hands, gathered by the sweat of the brow. He
ensures it is guarded and protected, thinking: 'How can I prevent my
wealth from being taken by rulers or bandits, consumed by fire, swept
away by flood, or taken by unloved heirs?' This is called accomplishment
in protection.

And what is accomplishment in good friendship? It's when a gentleman
resides in a town or village. And in that place there are householders
or their children who may be young or old, but are mature in conduct,
accomplished in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. He associates
with them, converses and engages in discussion. And he emulates the same
kind of accomplishment in faith, ethics, generosity, and wisdom. This is
called accomplishment in good friendship.

And what is accomplishment in balanced finances? It's when a gentleman,
knowing his income and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither
too extravagant nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will
exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' It's like an appraiser or their
apprentice who, holding up the scales, knows that it's low by this much
or high by this much. In the same way, a gentleman, knowing his income
and expenditure, balances his finances, being neither too extravagant
nor too frugal. He thinks, 'In this way my income will exceed my
expenditure, not the reverse.' If a gentleman has little income but an
opulent life, people will say: 'This gentleman eats their wealth like a
fig-eater!' If a gentleman has a large income but a spartan life, people
will say: 'This gentleman is starving themselves to death!' But a
gentleman, knowing his income and expenditure, leads a balanced life,
neither too extravagant nor too frugal, thinking, 'In this way my income
will exceed my expenditure, not the reverse.' This is called
accomplishment in balanced finances.

And what is accomplishment in faith? It's when a gentleman has faith in
the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha ... teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' This
is called accomplishment in faith.

And what is accomplishment in ethics? It's when a gentleman doesn't kill
living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume beer,
wine, and liquor intoxicants. This is called accomplishment in ethics.

And what is accomplishment in generosity? It's when a gentleman lives at
home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed,
loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
This is called accomplishment in generosity.

And what is accomplishment in wisdom? It's when a gentleman is wise. He
has the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble, penetrative,
and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is called
accomplishment in wisdom.

These are the eight accomplishments.

> They're enterprising in the workplace,\
> diligent in managing things,\
> they balance their finances,\
> and preserve their wealth.
>
> Faithful, accomplished in ethics,\
> bountiful, rid of stinginess,\
> they always purify the path\
> to well-being in lives to come.
>
> And so these eight qualities\
> of a faithful householder\
> are declared by the one who is truly named\
> to lead to happiness in both spheres,
>
> welfare and benefit in this life,\
> and happiness in the next.\
> This is how, for a householder,\
> merit grows by generosity."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.77 Desires  *Icchāsutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, these eight people are found in the world. What eight?

First, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. And so they sorrow and
wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion because
they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant who
lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. And so they become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they acquire material
things, they become intoxicated and negligent. They've fallen from the
true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. And so they
sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they do not acquire
material things, they sorrow and lament. They've fallen from the true
teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. And so they
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. But when
they acquire material things, they become intoxicated and negligent.
They've fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. But material things don't come to them. But they don't sorrow
and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into confusion
because they don't get those material things. This is called a mendicant
who lives desiring material things. They try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But when they do not acquire material things, they
don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They try hard, strive, and make an effort to
get them. And material things do come to them. But they don't become
indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material things. This
is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things. They try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. But when they acquire material
things, they don't become intoxicated and negligent. They haven't fallen
from the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. And material things don't come to them. But they
don't sorrow and wail and lament, beating their breast and falling into
confusion because they don't get those material things. This is called a
mendicant who lives desiring material things. They don't try hard,
strive, and make an effort to get them. And when they do not acquire
material things, they don't sorrow and lament. They haven't fallen from
the true teaching.

Next, when a mendicant stays secluded, living independently, a desire
arises for material things. They don't try hard, strive, and make an
effort to get them. But material things do come to them. But they don't
become indulgent and fall into negligence regarding those material
things. This is called a mendicant who lives desiring material things.
They don't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get them. And when
they acquire material things, they don't become intoxicated and
negligent. They haven't fallen from the true teaching.

These eight people are found in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.78 Good Enough  *Alaṁsutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, a
mendicant with six qualities is good enough for themselves and others.
What six? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to skillful
teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard. They
examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding the
meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good
speaker who enunciates well. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate,
and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these six qualities is good
enough for themselves and others.

A mendicant with five qualities is good enough for themselves and
others. What five? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're a good
speaker. Their voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the
meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual
companions. A mendicant with these five qualities is good enough for
themselves and others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're not a
good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't
express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four qualities is
good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with four qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What four? A mendicant is quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these four
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for themselves but not
for others. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Understanding
the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly. They're not a
good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear, articulate, and doesn't
express the meaning. They don't educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire
their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three qualities is
good enough for themselves but not for others.

A mendicant with three qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What three? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. They readily memorize the teachings they've heard.
But they don't examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized. Not
understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't practice
accordingly. They're a good speaker. Their voice is polished, clear,
articulate, and expresses the meaning. They educate, encourage, fire up,
and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant with these three
qualities is good enough for others but not for themselves.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. They examine the meaning of teachings they've memorized.
Understanding the meaning and the teaching, they practice accordingly.
They're not a good speaker. Their voice isn't polished, clear,
articulate, and doesn't express the meaning. They don't educate,
encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A mendicant
with these two qualities is good enough for themselves but not for
others.

A mendicant with two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves. What two? A mendicant is not quick-witted when it comes to
skillful teachings. And they don't readily memorize the teachings
they've heard. Nor do they examine the meaning of teachings they've
memorized. Not understanding the meaning and the teaching, they don't
practice accordingly. They're a good speaker who enunciates well. Their
voice is polished, clear, articulate, and expresses the meaning. They
educate, encourage, fire up, and inspire their spiritual companions. A
mendicant with these two qualities is good enough for others but not for
themselves."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.79 Decline  *Parihānasutta*

"These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee. What
eight? They relish work, talk, sleep, and company. They don't guard the
sense doors and they eat too much. They relish closeness and
proliferation. These eight things lead to the decline of a mendicant
trainee.

These eight things don't lead to the decline of a mendicant trainee.
What eight? They don't relish work, talk, sleep and company. They guard
the sense doors, and they don't eat too much. They don't relish
closeness and proliferation. These eight things don't lead to the
decline of a mendicant trainee."

<!--pg-->
### AN 8.80 Grounds for Laziness and Arousing Energy  *Kusītārambhavatthusutta*

"Mendicants, there are eight grounds for laziness. What eight?

Firstly, a mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work
to do. But while doing it my body will get tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the first ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. But while working my body got tired. I'd better have a lie down.'
They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the
second ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. But while walking my body will get tired. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
This is the third ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. But while walking my body got tired. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the fourth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, coarse or fine. My body is tired and unfit for work. I'd better
have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for achieving
the unachieved, attaining the unattained, and realizing the unrealized.
This is the fifth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is heavy, unfit for work, like I've just eaten a load of
beans. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for achieving the unachieved, attaining the unattained, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the sixth ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. Lying down would be good for me. I'd better have a lie
down.' They lie down, and don't rouse energy for achieving the
unachieved, attaining the unattained, and realizing the unrealized. This
is the seventh ground for laziness.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. My body is weak and unfit
for work. I'd better have a lie down.' They lie down, and don't rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for laziness. These
are the eight grounds for laziness.

There are eight grounds for arousing energy. What eight? Firstly, a
mendicant has some work to do. They think: 'I have some work to do.
While working it's not easy to focus on the instructions of the Buddhas.
I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining the unattained,
achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.' They rouse
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. This is the first ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has done some work. They think: 'I've done some
work. While I was working I wasn't able to focus on the instructions of
the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse up energy ... This is the second ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has to go on a journey. They think: 'I have to
go on a journey. While walking it's not easy to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy
...' ... This is the third ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has gone on a journey. They think: 'I've gone
on a journey. While I was walking I wasn't able to focus on the
instructions of the Buddhas. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy
...' ... This is the fourth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, but they didn't get to
fill up on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've
wandered for alms, but I didn't get to fill up on as much food as I
like, rough or fine. My body is light and fit for work. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy ...' ... This is the fifth ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has wandered for alms, and they got to fill up
on as much food as they like, coarse or fine. They think: 'I've wandered
for alms, and I got to fill up on as much food as I like, coarse or
fine. My body is strong and fit for work. I'd better preemptively rouse
up energy ...' ... This is the sixth ground for arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant feels a little sick. They think: 'I feel a
little sick. It's possible this illness will worsen. I'd better
preemptively rouse up energy ...' ... This is the seventh ground for
arousing energy.

Furthermore, a mendicant has recently recovered from illness. They
think: 'I've recently recovered from illness. It's possible the illness
will come back. I'd better preemptively rouse up energy for attaining
the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.'
They rouse energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the
unachieved, and realizing the unrealized. This is the eighth ground for
arousing energy.

These are the eight grounds for arousing energy."

