# The Chapter on Abodes of Sentient Beings

### AN 9.21 In Three Particulars  *Tiṭhānasutta*

"The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the gods of the thirty-three and the
humans of the Black Plum Tree Land in three particulars. What three?
They're selfless and not possessive. They have a fixed lifespan. They
have a distinctive nature. The humans of Uttarakuru surpass the gods of
the thirty-three and the humans of the Black Plum Tree Land in these
three particulars.

The gods of the thirty-three surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the
Black Plum Tree Land in three particulars. What three? Heavenly
lifespan, beauty, and happiness. The gods of the thirty-three surpass
the humans of Uttarakuru and the Black Plum Tree Land in these three
particulars.

The humans of the Black Plum Tree Land surpass the humans of Uttarakuru
and the gods of the thirty-three in three particulars. What three?
Bravery, mindfulness, and the spiritual life is lived here. The humans
of the Black Plum Tree Land surpass the humans of Uttarakuru and the
gods of the thirty-three in these three particulars."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.22 A Wild Colt  *Assakhaḷuṅkasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you about three wild colts and three wild
people; three excellent horses and three excellent people; and three
fine thoroughbred horses and three fine thoroughbred people. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak.

And what are the three wild colts? One wild colt is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild colt is fast and beautiful,
but not well proportioned. While another wild colt is fast, beautiful,
and well proportioned. These are the three wild colts.

And what are the three wild people? One wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned. Another wild person is fast and
beautiful, but not well proportioned. While another wild person is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, but not beautiful or well proportioned?
It's when a mendicant truly understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This
is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ...
'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is
how they're fast, I say. But when asked a question about the teaching or
training, they falter without answering. This is how they're not
beautiful, I say. And they don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. This is how they're not well
proportioned, I say. This is how a wild person is fast, but not
beautiful or well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned?
They truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how they're
fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or training, they
answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. But they
don't receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for
the sick. This is how they're not well proportioned, I say. This is how
a wild person is fast and beautiful, but not well proportioned.

And how is a wild person fast, beautiful, and well proportioned? They
truly understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of
suffering' ... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the
practice that leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is how they're
fast, I say. When asked a question about the teaching or training, they
answer without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. They
receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the
sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say. This is how a wild
person is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three
wild people.

And what are the three excellent horses? One excellent horse ... is
fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three excellent
horses.

What are the three excellent people? One excellent person ... is fast,
beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is an excellent person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's when a mendicant, with the ending of the five lower
fetters, is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished there, and are
not liable to return from that world. This is how they're fast, I say.
When asked a question about the teaching or training, they answer
without faltering. This is how they're beautiful, I say. They receive
robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This
is how they're well proportioned, I say. This is how an excellent person
is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three excellent
people.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred horses? One fine thoroughbred
horse ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned. These are the three
fine thoroughbred horses.

And what are the three fine thoroughbred people? One fine thoroughbred
person ... is fast, beautiful, and well proportioned.

And how is a fine thoroughbred person ... fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned? It's a mendicant who realizes the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And they live having
realized it with their own insight due to the ending of defilements.
This is how they're fast, I say. When asked a question about the
teaching or training, they answer without faltering. This is how they're
beautiful, I say. They receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines
and supplies for the sick. This is how they're well proportioned, I say.
This is how a fine thoroughbred person is fast, beautiful, and well
proportioned. These are the three fine thoroughbred people."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.23 Rooted in Craving  *Taṇhāmūlakasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you about nine things rooted in craving. And
what are the nine things rooted in craving? Craving is a cause of
seeking. Seeking is a cause of gaining material things. Gaining material
things is a cause of evaluation. Evaluation is a cause of desire and
lust. Desire and lust is a cause of attachment. Attachment is a cause of
ownership. Ownership is a cause of stinginess. Stinginess is a cause of
safeguarding. Owing to safeguarding, many bad, unskillful things come to
be: taking up the rod and the sword, quarrels, arguments, and fights,
accusations, divisive speech, and lies. These are the nine things rooted
in craving."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.24 Abodes of Sentient Beings  *Sattāvāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are nine abodes of sentient beings. What nine?

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and diverse in
perception, such as human beings, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. This is the first abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are diverse in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods reborn in the Divinity's host through the
first absorption. This is the second abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and diverse in
perception, such as the gods of streaming radiance. This is the third
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are unified in body and unified in
perception, such as the gods of universal beauty. This is the fourth
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that are non-percipient and do not experience
anything, such as the gods who are non-percipient beings. This is the
fifth abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond perceptions of
form. With the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on
perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite space. This is the sixth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite space. Aware that 'consciousness is infinite', they have been
reborn in the dimension of infinite consciousness. This is the seventh
abode of sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
infinite consciousness. Aware that 'there is nothing at all', they have
been reborn in the dimension of nothingness. This is the eighth abode of
sentient beings.

There are sentient beings that have gone totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness. They have been reborn in the dimension of neither
perception nor non-perception. This is the ninth abode of sentient
beings.

These are the nine abodes of sentient beings."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.25 Consolidated by Wisdom  *Paññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant's mind has been well consolidated with
wisdom it's appropriate for them to say: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."'

And how is a mendicant's mind well consolidated with wisdom? The mind is
well consolidated with wisdom when they know: 'My mind is without
greed.' ... 'My mind is without hate.' ... 'My mind is without
delusion.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become greedy.' ... 'My mind is
not liable to become hateful.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become
deluded.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the sensual
realm.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the realm of
luminous form.' ... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the
formless realm.' When a mendicant's mind has been well consolidated with
wisdom it's appropriate for them to say: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place."'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.26 The Simile of the Stone Pillar  *Silāyūpasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

There Venerable Candikāputta addressed the mendicants,
"Reverends, Devadatta teaches the mendicants like this: 'When a
mendicant's mind is solidified by heart, it's appropriate for them to
say: "I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"'"

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him,
"Reverend Candikāputta, Devadatta does not teach the
mendicants like that. He teaches like this: 'When a mendicant's mind is
well consolidated by heart, it's appropriate for them to say: "I
understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed,
what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this
place.'"'"

For a second time ...

And for a third time Venerable Candikāputta addressed the
mendicants ...

And for a third time, Sāriputta said to him, "Reverend
Candikāputta, Devadatta does not teach the mendicants like
that. He teaches like this: 'When a mendicant's mind is well
consolidated by heart, it's appropriate for them to say: "I understand:
'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to
be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.'"'

And how is a mendicant's mind well consolidated by heart? The mind is
well consolidated by heart when they know: 'My mind is without greed.'
... 'My mind is without hate.' ... 'My mind is without delusion.' ...
'My mind is not liable to become greedy.' ... 'My mind is not liable to
become hateful.' ... 'My mind is not liable to become deluded.' ... 'My
mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the sensual realm.' ... 'My
mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the realm of luminous form.'
... 'My mind is not liable to return to rebirth in the formless realm.'

When a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if compelling
sights come into the range of vision they don't occupy their mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance.

Suppose there was a stone pillar, sixteen feet long. Eight feet were
buried underground, and eight above ground. And violent storms were to
blow up out of the east, the west, the north, and the south. They
couldn't make it tremor and tremble and quake. Why is that? It's because
that stone pillar is firmly embedded, with deep foundations. In the same
way, when a mendicant's mind is rightly freed like this, even if
compelling sights come into the range of vision they don't occupy their
mind. The mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance.

If even compelling sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... and
ideas come into the range of the mind they don't occupy the mind. The
mind remains untainted. It is steady, imperturbable, observing
disappearance."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.27 Dangers and Threats (1st)  *Paṭhamaverasutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and
threats, and has the four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they
wish, declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the
animal realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of
loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in this life and
in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and threats
either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental
pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ...

Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ...

Anyone who lies ...

Anyone who consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants creates dangers
and threats both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences
mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from consuming beer, wine,
and liquor intoxicants creates no dangers and threats either in this
life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental pain and
sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains
from consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants.

These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'

They have experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.'

They have experiential confidence in the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.'

And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones,
unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. These are the
four factors of stream-entry that they have.

When a noble disciple has quelled these five dangers and threats, and
has these four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish, declare
of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places,
the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.28 Dangers and Threats (2nd)  *Dutiyaverasutta*

"Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats,
and has the four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in this life and
in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and threats
either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental
pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ... commits sexual misconduct ... lies ... Anyone who
consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants creates dangers and threats
both in this life and in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and
sadness. Anyone who refrains from consuming beer, wine, and liquor
intoxicants creates no dangers and threats either in this life or in
lives to come, and doesn't experience mental pain and sadness. So that
danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains from consuming
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five dangers and
threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? When a noble
disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha ... the teaching ...
the Saṅgha ... And a noble disciple's ethical conduct is
loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred,
liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to
immersion. These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have.

When a noble disciple has quelled these five dangers and threats, and
has these four factors of stream-entry, they may, if they wish, declare
of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm,
and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad places,
the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in
the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.29 Grounds for Resentment  *Āghātavatthusutta*

"Mendicants, there are nine grounds for resentment. What nine? Thinking:
'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing
wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong to
someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong to someone I love' ... 'They
will do wrong to someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ...
'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help
someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment. These are the nine grounds
for resentment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.30 Getting Rid of Resentment  *Āghātapaṭivinayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these nine methods to get rid of resentment. What
nine? Thinking: 'They harmed me, but what can I possibly do?' you get
rid of resentment. Thinking: 'They are harming me ...' ... 'They will
harm me ...' ... 'They harmed someone I love ...' ... 'They are harming
someone I love ...' 'They will harm someone I love ...' ... 'They helped
someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ...
Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. These are the nine methods to get rid of
resentment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.31 Progressive Cessations  *Anupubbanirodhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these nine progressive cessations. What nine?

For someone who has attained the first absorption, sensual perceptions
have ceased.

For someone who has attained the second absorption, the placing of the
mind and keeping it connected have ceased.

For someone who has attained the third absorption, rapture has ceased.

For someone who has attained the fourth absorption, breathing has
ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite space, the
perception of form has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of infinite consciousness,
the perception of the dimension of infinite space has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of nothingness, the
perception of the dimension of infinite consciousness has ceased.

For someone who has attained the dimension of neither perception nor
non-perception, the perception of the dimension of nothingness has
ceased.

For someone who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling,
perception and feeling have ceased.

These are the nine progressive cessations."

