# The Chapter on Bases of Psychic Power

### AN 9.83 Weaknesses in Training and the Bases of Psychic Power  *Sikkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops
the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and
active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to mental development, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to inquiry, and active effort. To give up these five weaknesses in your
training you should develop these four bases of psychic power."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.84--91 Hindrances, Etc.  *Nīvaraṇasuttādi*

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the chapter on mindfulness meditation.)*
:::

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.92 Shackles of the Heart  *Cetasovinibandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed for sensual pleasures. ...
These are the five shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
bases of psychic power. What four? It's when a mendicant develops the
basis of psychic power that has immersion due to enthusiasm, and active
effort. They develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to energy, and active effort. They develop the basis of psychic power
that has immersion due to mental development, and active effort. They
develop the basis of psychic power that has immersion due to inquiry,
and active effort. To give up these five shackles of the heart you
should develop these four bases of psychic power."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### AN 9.93 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, nine things should be developed. What nine? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction
with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, not-self
in suffering, giving up, and fading away. For insight into greed, these
nine things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.94 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, nine things should be developed. What nine? The
first absorption, the second absorption, the third absorption, the
fourth absorption, the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness, the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception, and the cessation of perception
and feeling. For insight into greed, these nine things should be
developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.95--112 Untitled Discourses on Greed  *\~*

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of greed ... these nine things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.113--432 Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc.  *\~*

"For insight into hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain
... contempt ... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ...
deviousness ... obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ...
vanity ... for insight into negligence ... complete understanding ...
complete ending ... giving up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away
... ceasing ... giving away ... letting go of negligence ... these nine
things should be developed."

