# The Chapter on Right Efforts

### AN 9.73 Weaknesses in Training and Effort  *Sikkhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five weaknesses when you're training. What
five? Killing living creatures, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, and
consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five
weaknesses when you're training.

To give up these five weaknesses in your training you should develop the
four right efforts. What four? It's when a mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful
qualities that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try,
make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities
arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind,
and strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not
lost, but increase, mature, and are completed by development. To give up
these five weaknesses in your training you should develop these four
right efforts."

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.74--81 Hindrances, Etc.  *Nīvaraṇasuttādi*

::: small
*(Tell in full as in the chapter on mindfulness meditation.)*
:::

<!--pg-->
### AN 9.82 Shackles of the Heart  *Cetasovinibandhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five shackles of the heart. What five?
Firstly, a mendicant isn't free of greed, desire, fondness, thirst,
passion, and craving for sensual pleasures. ... These are the five
shackles of the heart.

To give up these five shackles of the heart you should develop the four
right efforts. What four? It's when a mendicant generates enthusiasm,
tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. ... so that unskillful qualities are
given up ... so that skillful qualities arise ... They generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that
skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase,
mature, and are completed by development. To give up these five shackles
of the hearts you should develop these four right efforts."

