# *Book 10*
SOCRATES’ NARRATION CONTINUES:
(595a) SOCRATES: You know that there are many other things about our city that
make me think we were entirely right in founding it as we did, but I am
particularly thinking of poetry when I say that.

GLAUCON: What about it?

SOCRATES: Our refusal to admit any of it that is imitative. Indeed, the
need not to admit it seems even more evident, in my view, now that we
(b) have distinguished the elements in the soul from one another.

GLAUCON: How do you mean?

SOCRATES: Between ourselves—for you won’t denounce me to the tragic
poets or any of the other imitative ones—I think all such poetry is likely to
corrupt the mind of those of its hearers who do not have the knowledge of
what it is really like as a drug to counteract it.

GLAUCON: What do you have in mind in saying that?

SOCRATES: I will have to tell you, even though a sort of reverential love I
have had for Homer since childhood makes me hesitate to speak.You see,
(c) he seems to have been the ﬁrst teacher and leader of all these ﬁne tragedi-
ans. All the same, a man should not be honored more than the truth. So, as
I say, I will have to tell you.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: Listen, then—or rather, answer my questions.

GLAUCON: Ask away.

SOCRATES: Could you tell me what imitation in general is? You see, I do
not entirely understand what it is supposed to be.

GLAUCON: So is it likely that I will?

SOCRATES: There would be nothing strange in that, since there are many
(596a) things the shortsighted see before the sharp-eyed!

GLAUCON: That’s right. But with you present, I could not possibly be very
eager to speak out even if there were something I saw. So, you will have to
do the looking yourself.

SOCRATES: Do you want us to begin our investigation with the following
point, then, in accordance with our usual procedure? I mean, as you know,
we usually posit some one particular form in connection with each set of
many things to which we apply the same name.1 Or don’t you understand?

GLAUCON: I do.

SOCRATES: Then in the present case, too, let’s take any set of many things
(b) you like. For example, there are, if you like, many couches and tables.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: But the forms connected to these manufactured items are
surely just two, one of a couch and one of a table.

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: Don’t we usually say, too, that the craftsman who makes each
manufactured item looks toward the form when he makes the couches or
the tables we use, and similarly with other things? For surely no craftsman
makes the form itself—

GLAUCON: How could he?

SOCRATES: Well, now, see what you would call this craftsman?
(c) GLAUCON: Which?

SOCRATES: The one who makes everything each individual handicrafts-
man makes.

GLAUCON: That’s an amazingly clever man you are talking about!

SOCRATES: Wait a minute and you will have even more reason to say that!

You see, this same handicraftsman is able to make not only every manufac-
tured item, but he also makes all the plants that grow from the earth, and
produces all the animals, including himself; and, in addition, he produces
earth and sky and gods and everything in the sky, and everything in Hades
beneath the earth.
(d) GLAUCON: You are talking about a wholly amazing sophist!

SOCRATES: You do not believe me? Tell me, do you think such a crafts-
(a) man is completely impossible? Or do you think there is a way in which
maker of all these things could exist, and a way in which he could not?

Don’t you see there is a certain way in which even you yourself could
make all of them?

GLAUCON: What way is that?

SOCRATES: It is not difﬁcult. On the contrary, it is a sort of craftsmanship
that is widely available and quick—and quickest of all, I suppose, if you are
[1]: See 478e7–480a13, 507b2–7.

willing to take a mirror and turn it around in all directions.That way you
(e) will quickly make the sun and the things in the sky; you will quickly make
the earth, yourself and the other animals, manufactured items, plants, and
everything else that was mentioned just now.

GLAUCON: Yes, their appearances, but certainly not the things themselves
as they truly are.

SOCRATES: Right! You attack the argument at just the right place. For I
think the painter is also one of these craftsmen, isn’t he?

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: But you will say, I think, that he does not make the things he
makes as they truly are—even though there is a certain way in which the
painter also makes a couch. Isn’t that right?

GLAUCON: Yes, he also makes the appearance of one.

SOCRATES: What about the couch-maker? Didn’t you just say that he does
not make the form—which we say is what a couch is2—but only a particu-
(597a)
lar couch?

GLAUCON: Yes, I did say that.

SOCRATES: Now, if he does not make what it is, he is not making what is,
but something that is like what is, but is not. So, if someone were to say
that the product of a couch-maker or any other handicraftsman completely
is, he probably would not be speaking the truth?

GLAUCON: That, at any rate, is what those who occupy themselves with
such arguments would think.

SOCRATES: So we should not be surprised if it also turns out to be some-
what dim in comparison to the truth.
(b) GLAUCON: No, we should not.

SOCRATES: Would you like us, then, to use these same examples to search
for that imitator of ours and what he really is?

GLAUCON: I would, if you would.

SOCRATES: Well, then, we have these three sorts of couches. One, that is
in nature,3 which I think we would say a god makes. Or is it someone else?

GLAUCON: No one, I suppose.

SOCRATES: One the carpenter makes.

GLAUCON: Yes.

[2]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. what it is.

[3]: I.e., that is in its nature a couch. See 597c2 and 490b3.

SOCRATES: And one the painter makes. Isn’t that so?

GLAUCON: It is.

SOCRATES: So painter, carpenter, and god—these three oversee three
kinds of couches?

[15]: GLAUCON: Yes, three.

SOCRATES: Now, the god, either because he did not want to, or because it
(c) was somehow necessary for him not to make more than one that is in its
nature a couch, made only the one that is what a couch itself is.4 Two or
more of these have not been naturally developed by the god and never will
be naturally developed.

GLAUCON: Why is that?

SOCRATES: Because, if he were to make only two, one would again come
to light whose form they in turn would both possess, and it would be what
(a) couch itself is, not the two.

GLAUCON: That’s right.

SOCRATES: The god knew this, I suppose, and, wishing to be the real
(d) maker of the real couch and not just some particular maker of some partic-
ular couch, naturally developed the one that is in its nature unique.

GLAUCON: Probably so.

SOCRATES: Would you like us to call him its natural maker, then, or some-
thing like that?

GLAUCON: It would be right to do so, at any rate, since it is by nature that
he has made it and all the others.

SOCRATES: What about the carpenter? Shouldn’t we call him the crafts-
man who makes a couch?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: And should we call a painter, too, a craftsman and maker of
such a thing?

GLAUCON: Certainly not.

SOCRATES: In that case, what is it you say he is, of a couch?
(e) GLAUCON: In my view, the most reasonable thing to call him is this: he is
an imitator of what the others are craftsmen of.

SOCRATES: All right. So the one whose product is three removed from the
natural one, you call an imitator?

GLAUCON: Certainly.

[4]: See 490b3, 532b1.

SOCRATES: So the tragedian too, if indeed he is an imitator, will be some-
one who is by his nature third from king and truth,5 and so will all the
other imitators.

GLAUCON: It looks that way.

SOCRATES: We are agreed about the imitator, then. Now, tell me this
about the painter: in each case, do you think it is what each thing itself is in
(598a) its nature that he is trying to imitate, or the products of the craftsmen?

GLAUCON: Those of the craftsmen.

SOCRATES: As they are, or as they appear to be? You have still to make that
distinction.

GLAUCON: How do you mean?

SOCRATES: This: if you look at a couch from the side or the front or from
anywhere else, does it differ in any way from itself? Or, while not differing
at all, does it appear different? And similarly with the others?

GLAUCON: The latter. It appears different, but is not different at all.
(b) SOCRATES: Then consider this very point: at what does painting aim in
each case? To imitate what is as it is? Or what appears as it appears? Is it an
imitation of an illusion, or of truth?

GLAUCON: Of an illusion.

SOCRATES: So, imitation is surely far removed from the truth. And the
reason that it produces everything, it seems, is that it grasps only a small
part of each thing—and that is an illusion. For example, the painter, we say,
can paint us a cobbler, a carpenter, or any other craftsman, even though he
(c) knows nothing about these crafts. All the same, if he is a good painter, by
painting a carpenter and displaying him at a distance, he might deceive
children and foolish adults into thinking it truly is a carpenter.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: In fact, my friend, I imagine that what we must bear in mind
in all these cases is this: when someone tells us he has met a human being
who knows every craft as well as everything else anyone knows, and that
there is nothing of which he does not have a more exact knowledge than
(d) anyone else, we should assume we are talking to a naïve fellow. He has
been deceived, it seems, by an encounter with some sort of sorcerer or
imitator, whom he therefore considers to be all-wise. But that is because
of his own inability to distinguish between knowledge, lack of knowledge,
and imitation.

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely true.

[5]: God is called king at Laws 10.904a6.

SOCRATES: Well, then, we must next consider tragedy and its leader,
Homer, since we hear from some that these men know every craft, every-
(e) thing relevant to human virtue and vice, and even all about divine matters.

They claim, you see, that if a good poet is to write beautiful poetry about
the things he writes about, he must have knowledge of them when he
writes, or else he would be unable to. We should consider, then, whether
those who tell us this have been deceived by their encounters with these
imitators and do not realize, when they see their works, that they are three
(599a) removes from what is, and are easy to produce without knowledge of the
truth. For they produce illusions, not things that are. Or whether there is
something in what they say, and good poets really do have knowledge of
the things about which the masses think they speak so well.

GLAUCON: We certainly must consider that.

SOCRATES: Do you think, then, that if someone could make both what is
imitated and its image, he would allow himself to take making images seri-
(b) ously, and put it at the forefront of his life as the best ability he had?

GLAUCON: No, I do not.

SOCRATES: But if he truly had knowledge of what he imitates, I suppose
he would take deeds much more seriously than their imitations, would try
to leave behind many beautiful deeds as his own memorials, and would be
much more eager to be the subject of a eulogy than the author of one.

GLAUCON: I suppose so. I mean, these things certainly are not equal either
in honor or in beneﬁt.

SOCRATES: Let’s not demand an account, then, of the other things from
(c) Homer or any other poet. Let’s not ask if any of them is a doctor or only an
imitator of what doctors say; or which people any of the poets, old or new,
has reportedly made healthy, as Asclepius did; or which students of medi-
cine he left behind, as Asclepius did his sons. And let’s not ask them about
the other crafts either, but leave them aside. When it comes, however, to
the most important and most beautiful things of which Homer undertakes
to speak—warfare, generalship, city government, and a person’s educa-
tion—surely, it is fair to question him as follows: “My dear Homer, if you
(d) are not third removed from the truth about virtue, and are not the sort of
craftsman of an image, which is what we deﬁned an imitator to be, but if
you are even in second place and capable of knowing what practices make
people better or worse in private or in public life, tell us which cities are
better governed because of you, as the Lacedaemonians are because of
Lycurgus, and as many others—big and small—are because of many other
(e) men. What city gives you credit for having proved to be a good lawgiver
who beneﬁted it? Italy and Sicily give it to Charondas, and we give it to
Solon.Who gives it to you?”Will he be able to name one?

GLAUCON: I suppose not. At any rate, none is mentioned even by the
Homeridae themselves.6
SOCRATES: Then is any war in Homer’s time remembered that was well
(600a) fought because of his leadership or advice?

GLAUCON: None at all.

SOCRATES: Then as you would expect in the case of a man wise in deeds,
are we told of his many ingenious inventions in the crafts or other activities,
as we are about Thales of Miletus and Anacharsis the Scythian?

GLAUCON: There’s nothing of that sort.

SOCRATES: Then if there is nothing of a public nature, is Homer said to
have been a leader, during his own lifetime, in the education of people who
loved associating with him and passed on a Homeric way of life to those
(b) who came later? Is he like Pythagoras, who was himself particularly loved
for this reason, and whose followers even today still seem to be conspicuous
for a way of life they call Pythagorean?

GLAUCON: Again, we are told nothing of this kind. Indeed, Socrates,
Creophylus, the companion of Homer, would presumably seem even more
ridiculous than his name7 suggests as an example of such education, if the
story told about Homer is true.You see, we are told that while he was alive,
(c) Creophylus completely neglected him.

SOCRATES: Yes, we are told that. But, Glaucon, if Homer had really been
able to educate people and make them better, if he had been able, not to
imitate such matters but to know about them, wouldn’t he have had many
companions who honored and loved him? Protagoras of Abdera, Prodicus
of Ceos, and a great many others are able to convince anyone who associ-
ates with them in private that he wouldn’t be able to manage his household
(d) or city unless they themselves supervised his education, and they are so
intensely loved because of this wisdom of theirs that their disciples do
everything except carry them around on their shoulders. Are we to believe,
then, that if Homer had been able to help people become virtuous, his
companions would have allowed either him or Hesiod to wander around as
rhapsodes, and wouldn’t have clung far tighter to them than to gold and
compelled them to come home and live with them? And if persuasion
(e) failed, wouldn’t they have followed them wherever they went until they
had received sufﬁcient education?

GLAUCON: I think what you say is entirely true, Socrates.

[6]: The rhapsodes and poets who recited and expounded Homer throughout the
Greek world.

[7]: It derives from two words, kreas (meat) and phylon (race or kind).A modern equiv-
alent might be “meathead.”

SOCRATES: Are we to conclude, then, that all poets, beginning with
Homer, imitate images of virtue and of all the other things they write
about, and have no grasp of the truth? Although, as we were saying just
now, a painter will make what seems to be a shoemaker to those who know
(601a) as little about shoemaking as he does himself, but who look at things in
terms of their colors and shapes.8
GLAUCON: That’s right.

SOCRATES: Similarly, I suppose, we will say that the poet uses words and
phrases to paint colored pictures of each of the crafts, even though he
knows only how to imitate them; so that others like himself, who look at
things in terms of words, will think he speaks extremely well about shoe-
making or generalship or anything else, provided he speaks with meter,
(b) rhythm, and harmony. That is how great a natural spell these things cast.

For if a poet’s works are stripped of their musical colorings and spoken just
by themselves, I think you know what they look like.You have surely seen
them.

GLAUCON: I certainly have.

SOCRATES: Don’t they resemble the faces of those who are young but not
really beautiful, after the bloom of youth has left them?

GLAUCON: Absolutely.

SOCRATES: Come on, then, consider this: the maker of an image—the
imitator—knows nothing, we say, about what is, but only about what
(c) appears. Isn’t that so?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: Then let’s not leave the story half-told. Let’s look at the whole
thing.

GLAUCON: Go on.

SOCRATES: A painter, we say, will paint reins and a bit?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: But it is the saddler and the blacksmith who make them?

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: Does the painter know what the reins and bit should be like,
then? Or do not even their makers—the saddler and the blacksmith—know
this, but only the one who knows how to use them, the horseman?

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely true.

SOCRATES: So, won’t we say that the same holds for everything?

[8]: See 476b4–8.

GLAUCON: What?

SOCRATES: That for each thing there are these three crafts: one that will
(d) use, one that will make, one that will imitate?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: Then aren’t the virtue, goodness, and correctness of each
manufactured item, living creature, and activity related to nothing but the
use for which each is made or naturally developed?

GLAUCON: They are.

SOCRATES: So it is entirely necessary, then, that the user of each thing has
the most experience of it, and that he inform the maker about what the
good and bad points are in the actual use of the thing he uses. For example,
it is the ﬂute player, I take it, who informs the ﬂute-maker about which
(e) ﬂutes respond well in actual playing, and prescribes how they should be
made, while the maker obeys him.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: Doesn’t the one who knows give information, then, about
good and bad ﬂutes, whereas the other, by relying on him, makes them?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: So, as regards the same manufactured item, its maker—
through associating with the one who knows and having to listen to the
one who knows—has correct belief about its good and bad qualities, while
(602a) its user has knowledge.

GLAUCON: Exactly.

SOCRATES: What about the imitator? Will he, on the basis of using the
things he paints, have knowledge of whether they are good and correct or
not? Or will he have correct belief through having to associate with the one
who knows and being told how he should paint them?

GLAUCON: Neither.

SOCRATES: So an imitator has neither knowledge nor correct belief about
whether the things he makes are good or bad.

GLAUCON: Apparently not.

SOCRATES: How well situated the poetic imitator is, then, in relation to
wisdom about the subjects of his poems!

GLAUCON: He isn’t really.

SOCRATES: And yet he will go on imitating all the same, even though he
(b) does not know in what way each thing is good or bad. On the contrary,
whatever appears good to the masses who know nothing—that, it seems, is
what he will imitate.

GLAUCON: What else?

SOCRATES: Apparently, then, we are fairly well agreed on the following:
that the imitator knows nothing worth mentioning about the things he
imitates, but that imitation is a kind of game, not something to be taken
seriously; and that tragic poets, whether in iambic or epic verse, are as imitative as they could possibly be.

GLAUCON: Absolutely.

SOCRATES: In the name of Zeus, then, this business of imitation is con-
(c) cerned with what is third removed from the truth. Isn’t that right?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: Now, then, on which of the elements in a human being does
it have its effect?

GLAUCON: What sort of element do you mean?

SOCRATES: This sort: the same object, viewed from nearby, does not
appear the same size, I presume, as when viewed from a distance.

GLAUCON: No, it does not.

SOCRATES: And the same things appear bent and straight when seen in
water or out of it, or concave and convex because sight is misled by colors;
(d) and every other similar sort of confusion is clearly present in our soul. It is
because it exploits this weakness in our nature that illusionist painting is
nothing short of sorcery, and neither are jugglery or many other similar
sorts of trickery.

GLAUCON: True.

SOCRATES: And haven’t measuring, counting, and weighing proved to be
most welcome assistants in these cases, ensuring that what appears bigger or
smaller or more numerous or heavier does not rule within us, but rather
what has calculated or measured or even weighed?

GLAUCON: Of course.
(e) SOCRATES: And that is the task of the soul’s rational element?

GLAUCON: Yes, of it.

SOCRATES: But quite often, when it has measured and indicates that some
things are larger or smaller than others, or the same size, the opposite
simultaneously appears to hold of these same things.

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: And didn’t we say that it is impossible for the same thing to
believe opposites about the same thing at the same time?9
[9]: 436b8–c1.

GLAUCON: Yes, and we were right to say it.

SOCRATES: So, the element in the soul that believes contrary to the mea-
surements and the one that believes in accord with the measurements could
(603a) not be the same.

GLAUCON: No, they could not.

SOCRATES: But the one that puts its trust in measurement and calculation
would be the best element in the soul.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: So the one that opposes it would be one of the inferior parts
in us.

GLAUCON: Necessarily.

SOCRATES: That, then, was what I wanted to get agreement about when I
said that painting—and imitation as a whole—are far from the truth when
they produce their work; and moreover that imitation really consorts with
an element in us that is far from wisdom, and that nothing healthy or true
(b) can come from their relationship or friendship.

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely right.

SOCRATES: So, imitation is an inferior thing that consorts with another
inferior thing to produce inferior offspring.

GLAUCON: So it seems.

SOCRATES: Does this apply only to the imitation that is visible, or also to
the one that is audible—the one we call poetry?

GLAUCON: It probably applies to that as well.

SOCRATES: Well, let’s not rely solely on a probable analogy with painting.

Instead, let’s also go directly again to the very element in our mind with
(c) which poetic imitation consorts and see whether it is inferior or excellent.

GLAUCON: Yes, we should.

SOCRATES: Then let’s put it as follows. Imitative poetry, we say, imitates
human beings acting under compulsion or voluntarily, who, as a result of
these actions, believe they are doing either well or badly, and so experience
either pain or enjoyment in all these situations. Does it imitate anything
apart from these?

GLAUCON: Not a thing.

SOCRATES: So, is a human being of one mind in all these circumstances
then? Or, just as in the case of visible representation, where he was split
(d) into factions and had opposite beliefs in him about the same things at the
same time, is he also split into factions and at war with himself in matters of
action? But I am reminded that there is really no need now for us to reach

agreement on this question.You see, in our earlier arguments, we were suf-
ﬁciently agreed about all that when we said that our soul is ﬁlled with myr-
iad opposites of that sort at the same time.10
GLAUCON: And rightly so.

SOCRATES: Yes, it was right. But we omitted something then that I now
(e) think we must discuss.

GLAUCON: What’s that?

SOCRATES: When a good man suffers some stroke of bad luck, such as the
loss of a son or something else he values very highly, we also said in our ear-
lier arguments, as you know, that he will bear it more easily than others.11

GLAUCON: We certainly did.

SOCRATES: Now, let’s consider this: will he not grieve at all? Or, since that
is impossible, will he be somehow measured in the face of pain?

GLAUCON: The latter is probably closer to the truth.

SOCRATES: Now, tell me this about him: do you think he will be more
(604a) likely to ﬁght and resist pain when he is seen by his equals, or when he is
just by himself in a solitary place?

GLAUCON: He’s sure to ﬁght it far more when he is being seen.

SOCRATES: But when he is alone, I imagine, he will venture to say many
things he would be ashamed if someone else heard, and to do many things
he would not want anyone else to see him doing.

GLAUCON: That’s right.

SOCRATES: And isn’t it reason and law that tell him to resist, while what
(b) urges him to give in to the pains is the feeling itself?

GLAUCON: True.

SOCRATES: And when there are opposite impulses in a human being in
relation to the same thing at the same time, we say that there must be two
elements in him.

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: Isn’t one part ready to be persuaded to follow the law, wher-
ever the law leads?

GLAUCON: Can you explain how?

SOCRATES: The law says, as you know, that it is best to keep as quiet as
possible in misfortunes and not get irritated, since what is really good or
bad in such things is not clear. There is nothing to be gained by taking

[10]: 439c2–441c7.
[11]: 387d4–e4.

them hard, nor is any aspect of human affairs worth getting very serious
about. And the very thing whose aid we need as quickly as possible in such
(c) circumstances is the one our grieving hinders.

GLAUCON: Which do you mean?

SOCRATES: The capacity to deliberate about what has happened and, as
with the fall of the dice, to arrange our affairs, given what has befallen us,
in whatever way reason determines would be best. Instead of acting like
children who have fallen over, and who hold on to the hurt part and spend
their time wailing, we should always accustom our souls to turn as quickly
(d) as possible to curing and raising up the part that has suffered a fall and is
sick, so as to banish lamentation by means of medicine.

GLAUCON: That would be the most correct way to deal with bad luck,
anyway.

SOCRATES: So it is the best element, we say, that is willing to follow this
rational calculation.

GLAUCON: Clearly.

SOCRATES: As for the part that leads us to recollections of our suffering
and to lamentations, and is insatiable for these things, won’t we say that it is
the element that lacks reason, is idle, and is a friend of cowardice?

GLAUCON: We certainly will.

SOCRATES: Now, this element—the one that gets irritated—admits of
(e) much complex imitation; whereas the wise and quiet character, which
always remains pretty much selfsame, is neither easy to imitate nor easy to
understand when imitated—especially not at a festival where multifarious
people are gathered together in theaters. For the experience being imitated
is alien to them.
(605a) GLAUCON: Absolutely.

SOCRATES: The imitative poet, then, clearly does not naturally relate to
this best element in the soul, and his wisdom is not directed to pleasing it—
not if he is going to attain a good reputation with the masses—but to the
irritable and complex character, because it is easy to imitate.

GLAUCON: Clearly.

SOCRATES: So, it would at last be right to take him and place him beside
the painter as his counterpart. For he is like the latter in producing things
that are inferior as regards truth, and is also similar to him in associating
(b) with the other element in souls, not with the best one. So, we would also at
last be justiﬁed in not admitting him into a city that is to be well governed.

You see, he arouses and nourishes this element in the soul and, by making it
strong, destroys the rational one—just as someone in a city who makes

wicked people strong, by handing the city over to them, ruins the better
ones. Similarly, we will say an imitative poet produces a bad constitution in
the soul of each individual by making images that are very far removed
(c) from the truth and by gratifying the element in it that lacks understanding
and cannot distinguish bigger from smaller, but believes the same things to
be now large, now small.12
GLAUCON: He does, indeed.

SOCRATES: But we haven’t yet brought our chief charge against imitation.

For its power to corrupt all but a very few good people is surely an alto-
gether terrible one.

GLAUCON: It certainly is, if it really can do that.

SOCRATES: Listen and consider.When even the best of us hear Homer, or
some other tragic poet, imitating one of the heroes in a state of grief and
(d) making a long speech of lamentation, or even chanting and beating his
breast, you know we enjoy it and give ourselves over to it.We suffer along
with the hero and take his sufferings seriously. And we praise the one who
affects us most in this way as a good poet.

GLAUCON: Of course I know.

SOCRATES: But when one of us suffers a personal loss, you also realize we
do the opposite: we pride ourselves if we are able to keep quiet and endure
(e) it, in the belief that that is what a man does, whereas what we praised before
is what a woman does.

GLAUCON: I do realize that.

SOCRATES: Is praise of that sort rightly bestowed, then? Is it right to look
at the sort of man we would be, not honored, but rather ashamed to resem-
ble, and instead of being disgusted by what we see to enjoy and praise it?

GLAUCON: No, by Zeus, that does not seem reasonable.

SOCRATES: Yes, it does. At least, it does if you look at it in the following
(606a) way.

GLAUCON: How?

SOCRATES: If you reﬂect as follows: what is forcibly kept in check in our
personal misfortunes and has an insatiable hunger for weeping and lament-
ing—since that is what it has a natural appetite for—is the very factor that
gets satisfaction and enjoyment from the poets. Second, our naturally best
element, since it has not been adequately educated by reason or habit,
relaxes its guard over the lamenting one, since it is watching the sufferings
(b) of somebody else and thinks there is no shame involved for it in praising
and pitying another purportedly good man who grieves excessively. On the
[12]: See 523b9–524a5.

contrary, it thinks that to be a clear proﬁt—I mean the pleasure it gets. And
it would not want to be deprived of it by despising the whole poem.You
see, I think only a few people are able to calculate that the enjoyment of
other people’s sufferings is inevitably transferred to one’s own, since, when
pity is nourished and strengthened by the former, it is not easily suppressed
in the case of one’s own sufferings.
(c) GLAUCON: That’s absolutely true.

SOCRATES: Doesn’t the same argument also apply to humor? You see, if
there are jokes you would be ashamed to tell yourself, but that you very
much enjoy when you hear them imitated in a comedy or even in private,
and that you don’t hate as something bad, aren’t you doing the same as with
the things you pity? For the element in you that wanted to tell the jokes, but
which you held back by means of reason because you were afraid of being
reputed a buffoon, you now release; and having made it strong in that way,
you have been led unawares into becoming a comedian in your own life.

GLAUCON: Exactly.
(d) SOCRATES: And in the case of sexual desires, anger, and all the appetites,
pains, and pleasures in the soul, which we say accompany every action of
ours, the effect of poetic imitation on us is the same. I mean, it nurtures
and waters them when they should be dried up, and establishes them as rul-
ers in us when—if we are to be become better and happier rather than
worse and more wretched—they should be ruled.

GLAUCON: I cannot disagree with you.
(e) SOCRATES: In that case, Glaucon, when you meet admirers of Homer—
who tell us that this is the poet who educated Greece, and that for the
management of human affairs and education in them, one should take up
his works and learn them and live guided by this poet in the arrangement of
one’s whole life—you should befriend and welcome them, since they are
(607a) the best they are capable of being. And you should agree that Homer is the
most poetic of the tragedians and the ﬁrst among them. Nonetheless, be
aware that hymns to the gods and eulogies of good people are the only
poetry we can admit into our city. For if you admit the honeyed Muse,
whether in lyric or epic poetry, pleasure and pain will be kings in your city
instead of law and the thing that has always been generally believed to be
best—reason.

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely true.
(b) SOCRATES: Let that, then, be our defense for our return to the topic of
poetry, which shows that, given her nature, we were right to banish her from
the city earlier, since our argument compelled us. But let’s also tell her—in
case we are charged with some harshness and boorishness—that there is an
ancient quarrel between poetry and philosophy. For such expressions as “the

bitch yelping at its master” and “howling,” and “great in the empty elo-
(c) quence of fools,” and “control by a mob of the omni-wise,” and “the subtle
thinkers who are beggars all,” and countless others are signs of this old oppo-
sition.13 All the same, let it be said that, if the imitative poetry that aims at
pleasure has any argument to show it should have a place in a well-governed
city, we would gladly welcome it back, since we are well aware of being
charmed by it ourselves. Still, it is not pious to betray what one believes to be
the truth.What about you, my friend; aren’t you also charmed by it, espe-
(d) cially when it is through Homer that you look at it?

GLAUCON: Very.

SOCRATES: Isn’t it just, then, for her to reenter in that way, when she has
defended herself in lyric or some other meter?

GLAUCON: Yes, indeed.

SOCRATES: Then we will surely allow her defenders—the ones who are
not poets themselves, but lovers of poetry—to argue without meter on her
behalf, showing that she gives not only pleasure but also beneﬁt both to
constitutions and to human life. Indeed, we will listen to them graciously,
since we would certainly proﬁt if poetry were shown to be not only pleas-
(e) ant but also beneﬁcial.

GLAUCON: How could we fail to proﬁt?

SOCRATES: But if it is not, my dear comrade, we will behave like men
who have fallen in love. If they do not believe their passion is beneﬁcial,
hard though it is, they nonetheless stay away. And we too, because of the
passion for this sort of poetry implanted in us by our upbringing in those
(608a) ﬁne constitutions, are well disposed to have her appear in the best and tru-
est light. But as long as she is not able to produce such a defense, then
whenever we listen to her, we will chant to ourselves the argument we just
now put forward as a counter-charm to prevent us from slipping back into
the childish passion that the masses have. For we have come to see that such
poetry is not to be taken seriously, as a serious undertaking that grasps
truth; but that anyone who listens to it should be careful, if he is concerned
(b) about the constitution within him, and should believe what we have said
about poetry.

GLAUCON: I completely agree.

SOCRATES: It is a great struggle, my dear Glaucon, greater than people
think, to become good rather than bad. So, we must not be tempted by

[13]: Philosophers, such as Xenophanes and Heraclitus, attacked Homer and Hesiod for
their immoral tales about the gods. Poets, such as Aristophanes in his Clouds, attacked
philosophers for subverting traditional ethical and religious values.The sources of
these particular quotations, however, are unknown.

honor, money, or any sort of ofﬁce whatever—not even by poetry!—into
thinking that it is worthwhile to neglect justice and the rest of virtue.

GLAUCON: I agree with you on the basis of what we have said. And so, I
think, would anyone else.
(c) SOCRATES: And yet the greatest rewards of virtue, and the prizes proposed
for it, have not been discussed.

GLAUCON: You must have something incredibly great in mind, if it is
greater than those already mentioned!

SOCRATES: In a short period of time, could anything really great come to
pass? I mean, the entire period from childhood to old age is surely short
when compared to the whole of time.

GLAUCON: It’s a mere nothing.

SOCRATES: Well, then, do you think an immortal thing should be seri-
(d) ously concerned with that period rather than the whole of time?

GLAUCON: I suppose not, but what exactly do you have in mind by that?

SOCRATES: Haven’t you realized that our souls are immortal and never
destroyed?

> *He looked at me and said in amazement:*
No, by Zeus, I have not. But are you really in a position to assert that?

SOCRATES: I certainly ought to be, and I think you are, too.There is noth-
ing difﬁcult about it.

GLAUCON: There is for me. So I would be glad to hear from you about
this non-difﬁcult topic!

SOCRATES: Listen then.

GLAUCON: All you have to do is speak!

SOCRATES: Do you think there is a good and a bad?

GLAUCON: I do.
(e) SOCRATES: And do you think about them the same way I do?

GLAUCON: What way?

SOCRATES: What destroys and corrupts coincides entirely with the bad,
while what preserves and beneﬁts coincides entirely with the good.

GLAUCON: I do.

SOCRATES: And do you think there is a good and a bad for each thing,
such as ophthalmia for the eyes, sickness for the whole body, blight for
(609a) grain, rot for wood, rust for iron and bronze, and, as I say, a natural badness
and sickness for nearly everything?

GLAUCON: I certainly do.

SOCRATES: And when one of them attaches itself to something, doesn’t it
make the thing to which it attaches itself deﬁcient? And in the end, doesn’t
it break it down completely and destroy it?

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: So the badness natural to each thing—the deﬁciency peculiar
to each—destroys it, but if that does not destroy it, there is nothing else left
(b) to destroy it. For obviously the good will never destroy anything, and again
what is neither good nor bad won’t either.

GLAUCON: How could it?

SOCRATES: So if we discover something, the badness of which causes it to
deteriorate but cannot break it down and destroy it, won’t we immediately
know that something with such a nature cannot be destroyed after all?

GLAUCON: That seems reasonable.

SOCRATES: Well, then, what about the soul? Isn’t there something that
makes it bad?

GLAUCON: Certainly. All the things we were discussing earlier: injustice,
(c) intemperance, cowardice, and ignorance.

SOCRATES: Do any of these break it down and destroy it? Think about it,
so we are not deceived into believing that when an unjust and foolish per-
son is caught, he is destroyed by injustice, which is a deﬁciency in a soul.

Instead, let’s proceed this way: just as the body’s deﬁciency, which is disease,
wastes and destroys a body, and brings it to the point of not being a body at
all, so all the things we mentioned just now reach the point of not being
(d) when their own peculiar badness attaches itself to them, is present in them,
and destroys them. Isn’t that so?

GLAUCON: Yes.

SOCRATES: Come on, then, and look at the soul in the same way. When
injustice and the rest of vices are present in it, does their presence in it and
attachment to it corrupt and wither it until they bring it to the point of
death and separate it from the body?

GLAUCON: No, they never do that.

SOCRATES: But surely it is unreasonable to suppose that a thing is
destroyed by something else’s deﬁciency and not by its own?

GLAUCON: It is unreasonable.

SOCRATES: Think about it, Glaucon.We do not even believe that a body
(e) would be destroyed by the deﬁciency belonging to foods, whether it is
staleness, rottenness, or anything else. But if the foods’ own deﬁciency
induces bodily deterioration, we will say the body was destroyed through
them by its own badness, which is disease. But we will never admit that the
body is destroyed by the deﬁciency belonging to foods—since they and the
(610a) body are different things—except when external badness induces the natu-
ral badness.

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely right.

SOCRATES: By the same argument, then, if the body’s deﬁciency does not
induce a soul’s own deﬁciency in a soul, we will never admit that a soul is
destroyed by external badness in the absence of its own peculiar deﬁ-
ciency—one thing by another’s badness.

GLAUCON: Yes, that’s reasonable.

SOCRATES: Well, then, let’s refute these arguments and show that what we
said was not right. Or, so long as they remain unrefuted, let’s never say that
(b) the soul even comes close to being destroyed by a fever or any other disease,
or by killing for that matter—not even if one were to cut the entire body
up into the very smallest pieces—until someone demonstrates to us that
these conditions of the body make the soul itself more unjust and more
impious. But when an external badness is present, while its own particular
badness is absent, let’s not allow anyone to say that a soul or anything else
(c) whatever is destroyed.

GLAUCON: But you may be sure no one will ever prove that the souls of
the dying are made more unjust by death!

SOCRATES: But suppose someone dares to come to grips with our argu-
ment and—simply in order to avoid having to agree that our souls are
immortal—dares to say that a dying man does become worse and more
unjust.We are sure to reply that if what he says is true, injustice must be as
deadly as a disease to those who have it, and that those who catch it must
(d) die because of its own deadly nature—with the worst cases dying quickly
and the less serious ones more slowly—and not as now in fact happens,
where the unjust are put to death because of their injustice by others who
inﬂict the penalty.

GLAUCON: By Zeus, injustice won’t seem so altogether terrible if it will be
deadly to the person who contracts it, since then it would be an escape from
evils! But I am more inclined to think that it will be shown to be entirely
(e) the opposite—something that kills others if it can, but makes its possessor
very lively indeed—and not just lively, but positively sleepless! That’s how
far it is, in my view, from being deadly.

SOCRATES: You are right. After all, if its own deﬁciency—its own bad-
ness—is not enough to kill and destroy the soul, an evil designed for the
destruction of something else will hardly destroy the soul, or anything else
except what it is designed to destroy.

GLAUCON: “Hardly” is right, it seems.

SOCRATES: Then when something is not destroyed by a single bad thing—
(611a) whether its own or an external one—clearly it must always exist. And if it
always exists, it is immortal.

GLAUCON: It must be.

SOCRATES: Well, then, let’s assume it to be so. And if it is so, you realize
that the same ones will always exist. I mean, they surely could not become
fewer in number if none is destroyed, or more numerous either. For if any-
thing immortal is increased, you know that the increase would have to
come from the mortal, and then everything would end up being immortal.

GLAUCON: True.

SOCRATES: Then we must not think such a thing—for our argument does
not allow it. And we must not think, either, that the soul in its truest nature
(b) is full of multicolored variety and dissimilarity and conﬂict with itself.

GLAUCON: How do you mean?

SOCRATES: It is not easy for something to be immortal when it is com-
posed of many elements and is not composed in the most beautiful way—
which is how the soul now seemed to us.

GLAUCON: It probably isn’t.

SOCRATES: Yet both our recent argument and others as well require us to
accept that the soul is immortal. But what it is like in truth, seen as it
should be, not maimed by its partnership with the body and other bad
(c) things, which is how we see it now, what it is like when it has become
pure—that we can adequately see only by means of rational calculation.

And you will ﬁnd it to be a much more beautiful thing than we thought
and get a much clearer view of all the cases of justice and injustice and of all
the other things that we have so far discussed. So far, what we have said
about the soul is true of it as it appears at present. But the condition we
have seen it in is like that of all the sea god Glaucus,14 whose original nature
(d)
cannot easily be made out by those who catch glimpses of him, because
some of the original parts of his body have been broken off, others have
been worn away and altogether mutilated by the waves, and other things—
shells, seaweeds, and rocks—have grown into him, so that he looks more
like any wild beast than what he naturally was. Such, too, is the condition
of the soul when we see it beset by myriad bad things. But, Glaucon, we
should be looking in another direction.

GLAUCON: Where?

[14]: Ancient paintings may have represented Glaucus in the way Plato describes him
here. His name appears in the accusative (Glaukon), suggesting a play on Glaucon
> *(Glaukôn).*

SOCRATES: To its love of wisdom.15 We must keep in mind what it grasps
(e) and the kinds of things with which it longs to associate, because it is akin to
what is divine and immortal and what always exists, and what it would
become if it followed this longing with its whole being and if that impulse
(612a) lifted it out of the sea in which it now is, and struck off the rocks and shells
that, because it now feasts on earth, have grown around it in a wild, earthy,
and stony profusion as a result of those so-called happy feastings.16 And then
you would see its true nature, whether multiform or uniform,17 or some-
how some other way. But we have given a pretty good account now, I
think, of what its condition is and what form it takes in human life.

GLAUCON: We certainly have.

SOCRATES: In the course of our discussion, then, did we respond to the
other points, without having to invoke the rewards and reputations of jus-
tice, as you all said Homer and Hesiod did?18 Instead, haven’t we found
(b)
that justice itself is the best thing for the soul itself, and that the soul should
do what is just, whether it has Gyges’ ring or not, or even the cap of Hades
as well.19

GLAUCON: That’s absolutely true.We have.

SOCRATES: So, Glaucon, isn’t it now at last unobjectionable, in addition,
also to give back to justice and the rest of virtue both the kind and quantity
(c) of wages they bring to the soul, both from human beings and from gods,
both during life and after death?

GLAUCON: Certainly.

SOCRATES: Then will you give me back what you borrowed from me in
the course of the discussion?

GLAUCON: What in particular?

SOCRATES: I granted you that the just man should seem unjust and the
unjust one just. For you thought that even if it would be impossible for
these things to remain hidden from both gods and human beings, all the
same, it had to be granted for the sake of argument, so that justice itself
could be judged in relation to injustice itself.20 Don’t you remember?
(d)
[15]: Philosophia.

[16]: See 519a8–b5.

[17]: Eite polueidês eite monoeidês: having many elements or only one.

[18]: The reference is to the challenge posed by Glaucon and Adeimantus at 357a1–
367e5. But they, of course, are renewing the challenge posed by Thrasymachus in
Book 1 (see 358b1–c1).

[19]: The ring of Gyges is discussed at 359c6–360c5.The cap of Hades also made its
wearer invisible.

[20]: See 360e1–361d3, 367b2–e5.

GLAUCON: I would be unjust if I didn’t!

SOCRATES: Well, then, since they have now been judged, I ask on behalf
of justice for a return of the reputation it in fact has among gods and
human beings; and that we agree that it does indeed have such a reputation,
and so may carry off the prizes it gains for someone by making him seem
just; since we have already seen that it does give the good things that come
from being just, and does not deceive those who really possess it.
(e) GLAUCON: That’s a just request.

SOCRATES: Then won’t you ﬁrst give this back, that it certainly does not
remain hidden from the gods what each of the two is like?

GLAUCON: We will.

SOCRATES: But if it does not remain hidden, one would be loved by the
gods and one hated, as we agreed at the beginning.21

GLAUCON: That’s right.

SOCRATES: And won’t we also agree that everything that comes to the one
who is loved by gods—insofar as it comes from the gods themselves—is the
(613a) best possible, unless it is some unavoidable bad thing due to him for an ear-
lier mistake?22
GLAUCON: Certainly.

SOCRATES: Similarly, we must suppose that if a just man falls into poverty
or disease or some of the other things that seem bad, it will end well for
him during his lifetime or even in death. For surely the gods at least will
never neglect anyone who eagerly wishes to become just and, by practicing
(b) virtue, to make himself as much like a god as a human being can.

GLAUCON: It is certainly reasonable to think that a man of that sort won’t
be neglected by one who is like him.

SOCRATES: And mustn’t we think the opposite of the unjust one?

GLAUCON: Deﬁnitely.

SOCRATES: Those, then, are the sorts of prizes that come from the gods to
the just man.

GLAUCON: That’s certainly what I believe.

SOCRATES: What about from human beings? What does a just man get
from them? If we are to assert what is really the case, isn’t it this? Aren’t
clever but unjust men precisely like runners who run well on the ﬁrst leg
but not on the return one?23 They leap away sharply at ﬁrst, but in the end
[21]: 352a10–b2, 363a5–e4.

[22]: A foreshadowing of the doctrine of reincarnation introduced below.

[23]: The race is a sprint from one end of the stadium to the other and back.

they become ridiculous and, heads drooping, run off the ﬁeld uncrowned.
(c) True runners, on the other hand, make it to the end, collect the prizes, and
are crowned as victors. And isn’t it also generally what happens to just peo-
(a) ple? Toward the end of each course of action and association and of life as
whole, don’t they enjoy a good reputation and collect the prizes that come
from human beings?

GLAUCON: Of course.

SOCRATES: Will you then allow me to say about them what you said about
the unjust?24 For I will claim that it is the just who, when they are old
(d)
enough, hold the ruling ofﬁces in their city if they choose, marry from
whatever family they choose, and give their children in marriage to whom-
ever they please. Indeed, all the things that you said about the others, I now
say about these. As for the unjust, the majority of them, even if they remain
hidden when they are young, are caught by the end of the race and ridi-
culed, and, by the time they get old, have become wretched and are show-
ered with abuse by foreigners and citizens, beaten with whips, and made to
(e) suffer those punishments you rightly described as crude, such as racking
and burning. Imagine I have claimed that they suffer all such things.Well,
as I say, see if you will stand for it.

GLAUCON: Of course I will.What you say is right.

SOCRATES: Well, then, while the just man is alive, these are the sorts of
(614a) prizes, wages, and gifts he receives from gods and human beings, in addi-
tion to those good things that justice itself provides.

GLAUCON: Fine and secure ones they are, too!

SOCRATES: Well, they are nothing in number or size compared to those
that await each man after death.We must hear about them, too, so that, by
hearing them, each of these men may get back in full what he is owed by
the argument.

GLAUCON: Please describe them, then, since there are not many things it
(b) would be more pleasant to hear.

SOCRATES: Well, it is not an Alcinous-story I am going to tell you, but
that of a brave man called Er, the son of Armenias, by race a Pamphylian.25
[24]: 361d7–362c8.

[25]: Books 9–11 of the Odyssey were traditionally referred to as Alkinou apologoi, the
tales of Alcinous. Included among them is the story in Book 11 of Odysseus’ descent
into Hades. Since the word translated by “brave” is alkimou, which is very similar to
Alkinou, some sort of pun seems to be involved.The following is one attractive way
to interpret it. Alkinou might be taken as a compound of alkê (strength) + nous
(understanding) and alkimou as a compound of alkê + Mousa (a Muse). Socrates
would then be saying something like: it isn’t a tale that shows strength of understand-
ing that I’m going to tell but one that shows the strength of the Muse of storytelling.

Once upon a time, he was killed in battle. On the tenth day, when the rest
of the dead were picked up, they were already putrefying, but he was
picked up still quite sound.When he had been taken home and was lying
on the pyre before his funeral on the twelfth day, he revived and, after
reviving, told what he had seen in the other world.

He said that when his soul had departed, it traveled together with many
others and came to a daimonic26 place, where there were two adjacent
(c)
openings in the earth and two in the heavens above and opposite them.

Judges were seated between these. And, when they had made their judg-
ments, they told the just to go to the right up through the heavens, with
signs of the judgments attached to their fronts. But the unjust they told to
travel to the left and down. And they too had on their backs signs of all
(a) (d) their deeds. When he himself came forward, they said that he was to be
messenger to human beings to tell them about the things happening there,
and they told him to listen to and look at everything in the place.

Through one of the openings in the heavens and one in the earth, he saw
souls departing after judgment had been passed on them.Through the other
two, they were arriving. From the one in the earth they came up parched
and dusty, while from the one in the heavens they came down pure.And the
(e) ones that had just arrived seemed to have come from a long journey, and
went off gladly to the meadow, like a crowd going to a festival, and set up
camp there. Those that knew one another exchanged greetings and those
coming up from the earth asked the others about the things up there, while
those from the heavens asked about the others’ experiences.They told their
(615a) stories to one another, the former weeping and lamenting as they recollected
all they had suffered and seen on their journey below the earth—which
lasted a thousand years—and the ones from heaven telling, in turn, about
their happy experiences and the inconceivably beautiful sights they had seen.

To tell it all, Glaucon, would take a long time. But the gist, he said, was
this: for all the unjust things they had done and for all the people they had
wronged, they had paid the penalty for every one in turn, ten times over
for each.That is to say, they paid for each injustice once in every hundred
years of their journey, so that, on the assumption that a hundred years is
(b) roughly the length of a human life, they paid a tenfold penalty for each
injustice. For example, if some of them had caused many deaths or had
betrayed cities or armies and reduced them to slavery, or had taken part in
other evildoing, they would receive ten times the pain for each of them.

On the other hand, if they had done good deeds and become just and
pious, they received commensurate awards.

He said some other things about the stillborn and those who lived for
(c) only a short time, but they are not worth recounting. And he told of even
[26]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. daimon.

greater wages for impiety or piety toward gods or parents, and for murder.

He said he was there, you see, when someone asked where the great Ardi-
aius was.This Ardiaius had been a tyrant in a city in Pamphylia just a thou-
sand years before that, and was said to have killed his aged father and older
(d) brother and committed many other impious deeds as well. He said the one
who was asked responded: “He has not come here and never will. For in
fact this, too, was one of the terrible sights we saw.When we were near the
mouth, about to come up after all our sufferings were over, we suddenly
saw Ardiaius together with some others, almost all of whom were tyrants—
although there were also some private individuals among them who had
(e) committed great crimes.They thought that they were about to go up, but
the mouth would not let them through. Instead, it roared whenever one of
these incurably bad people, or anyone else who had not paid a sufﬁcient
penalty, tried to go up. At that location, there were savage men, all ﬁery to
look at, standing by, paying attention to the sound, who grabbed some of
these people and led them away. But in the case of Ardiaius and others, they
(616a) bound their feet, hands, and neck and threw them down and ﬂayed them.

They dragged them along the road outside, lacerating them on thorn
bushes.They explained to those who were passing by at the time why they
were being dragged away, and said that they were to be thrown into Tar-
tarus. He said that of the many and multifarious fears they experienced
there, the greatest each of them had was that the sound would be heard as
he came up, and that each was very pleased when it was silent as he went
up. Such then were the penalties and punishments, and the rewards that
(b) were their counterparts.

When each group had spent seven days in the meadow, on the eighth
they had to move on from there and continue their journey. In four days,
they came to a place where they could see stretching from above, through
the whole heaven and earth, a straight beam of light, like a column, very
closely resembling a rainbow, but brighter and more pure. They reached
the beam after traveling another day’s journey. And there, in the middle of
(c) the light, they saw stretching from the heavens the ends of its bonds—for
this light is what binds the heavens, like the cables underneath a trireme,
thus holding the entire revolving thing together. From those ends hangs the
spindle of Necessity, by means of which all the revolving things are turned.

Its shaft and hook were adamant, while its whorl27 was adamant mixed with
materials of other kinds. The nature of the whorl was as follows. Its shape
(d) was like the ones here on Earth, but from Er’s description, we must think
of it as being like this: in one large whorl, hollow and scooped out, lay
another just like it, only smaller, that ﬁtted into it exactly, the way nested
bowls ﬁt together; and similarly a third and a fourth, and four others. For
[27]: Sphondulon: the circular weight that twirls a spindle in weaving.

there were eight whorls altogether, lying inside one another, with their
rims appearing as circles from above, while from the back they formed one
(e) continuous whorl around the shaft, which is driven right through the cen-
ter of the eighth.

Now, the ﬁrst or outermost whorl had the broadest circular rim, that of
the sixth was second, third was that of the fourth, fourth that of the eighth,
ﬁfth that of the seventh, sixth that of the ﬁfth, seventh that of the third, and
eighth that of the second.That of the largest was spangled; that of the sev-
enth was brightest; that of the eighth took its color from the seventh’s shin-
(617a) ing on it; that of the second and ﬁfth were very similar to one another,
being yellower than the rest; the third was the whitest in color; the fourth
was reddish; and the sixth was second in whiteness.

The spindle as a whole revolved at the same speed, but within the
revolving whole the seven inner circles gently revolved in the opposite
direction to the whole. Of these, the eighth moved fastest; second, and at
(b) the same speed as one another, were the seventh, sixth, and ﬁfth; third, it
seemed to them, in the speed of its counter-revolution, was the fourth;
fourth was the third; and ﬁfth the second.28
The spindle revolved on the lap of Necessity. On top of each of its cir-
cles stood a Siren, who was carried around by its rotation, emitting a single
sound, one single note. And from all eight in concord, a single harmony
was produced. And there were three other women seated around it equi-
(c) distant from one another, each on a throne. They were the daughters of
Necessity, the Fates, dressed in white with garlands on their heads—
Lachesis, Clotho, and Atropos—and they sang to the accompaniment of
the Sirens’ harmony, Lachesis singing of the past, Clotho of the present,
and Atropos of the future. Clotho, using her right hand, touched the outer
[28]: Plato’s description of the beam of light and the spindle is difﬁcult. He compares
the light to hypozomata, or the ropes that bind a trireme together.These ropes seem
to have girded the trireme from stem to stern and to have entered it at both places.

Within the trireme, they were connected to some sort of twisting device that
allowed them to be tightened when the water caused them to stretch and become
slack.The spindle of Necessity seems to be just such a twisting device. Hence, the
extremities of the light’s bonds must enter into the universe just as the hypozomata
enter the trireme, and the spindle must be attached to these extremities, so that its
spinning tightens the light and holds the universe together.The light is thus like two
rainbows around the universe (or the whorl of the spindle), whose ends enter the
universe and are attached to the spindle.The upper half of the whorl of the spindle
consists of concentric hemispheres that ﬁt into one another, with their lips or rims
ﬁtting together in a single plane.The outer hemisphere is that of the ﬁxed stars; the
second is the orbit of Saturn; the third of Jupiter; the fourth of Mars; the ﬁfth of
Mercury; the sixth of Venus; the seventh of the sun; and the eighth of the moon.The
earth is in the center.The hemispheres are transparent and the width of their rims is
the distance of the heavenly bodies from one another.A convincing discussion is J. S.

Morrison,“Parmenides and Er.”The Journal of Hellenic Studies (1955) 75: 59–68.

circumference of the spindle and helped it turn, pausing from time to time;
Atropos, with her left, did the same to the inner ones; and Lachesis used
(d) each hand in turn to touch both.

When the souls arrived, they had to go straight to Lachesis. A sort of
spokesman29 ﬁrst arranged them in ranks; then, taking lots and models of
lives from the lap of Lachesis, he mounted a high platform, and said:

“The word of Lachesis, maiden daughter of Necessity! Ephemeral souls.

The beginning of another death-bringing cycle for mortal-kind!Your daimon
(e) will not be assigned to you by lot; you will choose him.The one who has the
ﬁrst lot will be the ﬁrst to choose a life to which he will be bound by necessity.

Virtue has no master: as he honors or dishonors it, so shall each of you have
more or less of it. Responsibility lies with the chooser; the god is blameless.”
After saying that, the spokesman threw the lots out among them all, and
each picked up the one that fell next to him—except for Er, who was not
allowed.And to the one who picked it up, it was clear what number he had
(618a) drawn. After that again the spokesman placed the models of lives on the
ground before them—many more of them than those who were present.

They were multifarious: all animal lives were there, as well as all human
lives. There were tyrannies among them, some life-long, others ending
halfway through in poverty, exile, and beggary.There were lives of famous
men—some famous for the beauty of their appearance or for their other
strengths or athletic prowess, others for their nobility and the virtues of
(b) their ancestors, and also some infamous in these respects—and similarly for
women. But the structure of the soul was not included, because with the
choice of a different life it would inevitably become different. But all the
other qualities were mixed with each other and with wealth or poverty,
sickness or health, or the states in between.

Here, it seems, my dear Glaucon, a human being faces the greatest dan-
ger of all, and because of that each must, to the neglect of all other subjects,
(c) take care above all else to be a seeker and student of that subject which will
enable him to learn and discover who will give him the ability and the
knowledge to distinguish a good life from a bad, so that he will always and
in any circumstances choose the better one from among those that are pos-
sible. He must calculate the effect of all the things we have mentioned just
now, both jointly and severally, on the virtue of a life, so as to know what
the good and bad effects of beauty are when it is mixed with wealth or
(d) poverty and this or that state of the soul; what the effects are of high and
low birth, private lives and ruling ofﬁces, physical strength and weaknesses,
ease and difﬁculties in learning, and all the things that are either naturally
part of the soul or can be acquired by it, when they are mixed with one
another. On the basis of all that he will be able, by considering the nature
[29]: Prophêtês: a prophet. Here in the sense of someone who speaks on behalf of a god.

of the soul, to reason out which life is better and which worse and choose
(e) accordingly, calling worse the one that will lead the soul to become more
unjust, and better the one that leads it to become more just. Everything else
he will ignore. For we have seen that this is the best way to choose,
whether in life or death.

Holding this belief with adamantine determination, he must go down to
Hades, so that even there he won’t be dazzled30 by wealth and other such
(619a)
evils, and won’t rush into tyrannies or other similar practices and so commit
irreparable evils, and suffer even greater ones; but instead will know to
choose the middle life in such circumstances, and avoid either of the
extremes, both in this life, so far as is possible, and in the whole of the life
(b) to come. For this is how a human being becomes happiest.

At that point our messenger from the other world also reported that the
spokesman said this:“Even for the one who comes last, if he chooses wisely
and lives earnestly, there is a satisfactory life available, not a bad one. Let not
the ﬁrst to choose be careless, nor the last discouraged.”
When the spokesman had told them that, Er said, the one who drew the
ﬁrst lot came up and immediately chose the greatest tyranny. In his foolish-
ness and greed, you see, he chose it without adequately examining every-
thing, and did not notice that it involved being fated to eat his own
(c) children, among other evils.When he examined the life at leisure, however,
he beat his breast and bemoaned his choice, ignoring the warning of the
spokesman. For he did not blame himself for these evils, but chance, dai-
mons, and everything except himself. He was one of those who had come
down from heaven, having lived his previous life in an orderly constitu-
tion,31 sharing in virtue through habit but without philosophy.
(d) Generally speaking, not the least number of the people caught out in
this way were souls who came from heaven, and so were untrained in suf-
ferings. The majority of those from the earth, on the other hand, because
they had suffered themselves and had seen others doing so, were in no rush
to make their choices. Because of that, and also because of the chance of
the lottery, there was an exchange of evils and goods for most of the souls.

Yet, if a person, whenever he came to the life that is here, always practiced
philosophy in a sound manner, and if the fall of the lot did not put his
(e) choice of life among the last, it is likely, from what was reported by Er
about the next world, that not only will he be happy here, but also that his
journey from here to there and back again will not be underground and
rough,32 but smooth and through the heavens.

[30]: See 364d3, 576d8.

[31]: Tetagmenê politeia: see 500c2 where the forms the philosopher looks to in design-
ing the constitution of Kallipolis are also said to be orderly.

[32]: See 364d3, 516e7.

He said it was a sight worth seeing how the various souls chose their
(620a) lives, since seeing it caused pity, ridicule, and surprise. For the most part,
their choice reﬂected the character of their former life. He saw the soul that
had once belonged to Orpheus, he said, choosing a swan’s life: he hated the
female sex because of his death at their hands, and so was unwilling to be
(a) conceived in a woman and born.33 He saw the soul of Thamyris choosing
nightingale’s life, a swan changing to the choice of a human life, and other
(b) musical animals doing the same.The twentieth soul chose the life of a lion.

It was that of Ajax, son of Telamon, who avoided human life because he
remembered the judgment about the armor.34 The next was that of
Agamemnon, which also hated the human race on account of what it suf-
fered, and so changed to the life of an eagle. Allotted a place in the middle,
the soul of Atalanta, when it saw the great honors of a male athlete, unable
to pass them by, chose his life. After her, he saw the soul of Epeius, son of
(c) Panopeus, taking on the nature of a craftswoman. Further on, among the
last, he saw the soul of the ridiculous Thersites clothing itself as an ape.

Now it chanced that Odysseus’ soul drew the last lot of all, and came to
make its choice. Remembering its former sufferings, it rejected love of
honor, and went around for a long time looking for the life of a private
individual who did his own work, and with difﬁculty it found one lying off
somewhere neglected by the others. When it saw it, it said that it would
(d) have done the same even if it had drawn the ﬁrst-place lot, and chose it
gladly. Similarly, souls went from the other animals into human beings, or
into one another; the unjust changing into savage animals, the just into
tame ones; and every sort of mixture occurred.

When all the souls had chosen lives, in the same allotted order they went
forward to Lachesis. She assigned to each the daimon it had chosen, as
(e) guardian of its life and fulﬁller of its choices.This daimon ﬁrst led the soul
under the hand of Clotho as it turned the revolving spindle, thus ratifying
the allotted fate it had chosen. After receiving her touch, he led the soul to
the spinning of Atropos, to make the spun fate irreversible.Then, without
turning around, it went under the throne of Necessity.When it had passed
(621a) through that, and when the others had also passed through, they all traveled
to the plain of Lethe, through burning and choking and terrible heat, for it
was empty of trees and earthly vegetation.They camped, since evening was
coming on, beside the river of forgetfulness, whose water no vessel can
hold. All of them had to drink a certain measure of this water. But those
not saved by wisdom drank more than the measure. And as each of them
[33]: According to one myth, Orpheus was killed and dismembered by Thracian
women, or Maenads.

[34]: Ajax thought that he deserved to be awarded the armor of the dead Achilles, but
instead it was awarded to Odysseus. Ajax was maddened by this injustice and later
killed himself because of the terrible things he had done while mad.

drank, he forgot everything. When they were asleep and midnight came,
(b) there was a clap of thunder and an earthquake, and they were suddenly car-
ried away from there, this way and that, up to their births, like shooting
stars. But Er himself was prevented from drinking the water.Yet how or
where he had come back to his body, he did not know, but suddenly
recovering his sight he now saw himself lying on the pyre at dawn.

And so, Glaucon, his story was saved and not lost; and it would save us, too,
(c) if we were persuaded by it, since we would safely cross the river Lethe with
our souls undeﬁled. But if we are persuaded by me, we will believe that the
soul is immortal and able to endure every evil and also every good, and
always hold to the upward path, practicing justice with wisdom every way
we can, so that we will be friends to ourselves and to the gods, both while
we remain here on Earth and when we receive the rewards of justice, and
go around like victors in the games collecting prizes; and so both in this life
and on the thousand-year journey we have described, we will fare well.

