[^98]: This sutta is the closest we come to a Buddhist myth of origins.
    It draws on features of Vedic mythology, while giving its own spin.
    Related stories may be found in [DN
    26](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato) and [Snp
    2.7](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato). The Buddha
    describes a natural process of evolution that requires no
    metaphysical intervention, yet differs strikingly from Darwinian
    evolution in prioritizing the role of desire over selection.

[^99]: After the Jetavana, this was the best-known monastery in
    Sāvatthī. It was offered by the lady
    Visākhā, known as Migāra's mother.

[^100]: We met Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja as the
    students of Pokkharasāti and Tārukkha
    respectively in [DN 13](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato), at
    the end of which they went for refuge. Some time later they must
    have asked for ordination. The commentary says that probation
    (*paravasati*) was required, not because they had previously gone
    forth in other sects (as the naked ascetic Kassapa at [DN
    8:24.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#24.1) or the wanderer
    Subhadda at [DN
    16:5.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.29.1)), nor
    because they had committed an offence, but because they were not yet
    the required twenty years of age.

[^101]: Here as in [DN 13](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato)
    Vāseṭṭha takes the lead.

[^102]: This verse is also at [MN
    84:9.19](https://suttacentral.net/mn84/en/sujato#9.19) and [MN
    93:5.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#5.4). \| For "best
    class" (*seṭṭho vaṇṇo*) see
    *varṇaśreṣṭhaḥ* at Mahābhārata 1.24.4c.

[^103]: Mahābhārata 12.181.5 says that brahmins are the
    white class, aristocrats red, peasants yellow, and menials black.
    Underlying this is an assumption of the superiority of the
    fair-skinned northerners of Indo-Aryan descent over the dark-skinned
    natives (see [DN
    3:1.10.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.10.3)).

[^104]: I cannot trace this statement to Brahmanical texts, and indeed
    they have a strong tendency to push back against the idea that only
    brahmins can find purity.

[^105]: An allusion to the famous Puruṣasūkta (Rig Veda
    10.90.12): "His (the cosmic Man's) mouth became the brahmin, his
    arms became the ruler (*rājanya*, an alternate name for
    the *khattiyas*), his thighs became the peasant
    (*vaiśya*); the menial (*sūdra*) was born
    from his feet." This belongs to the latest portion of the Rig Veda,
    and probably represents a time when the system of four castes was
    established in the late Vedic period, some centuries before the
    Buddha. Apart from this, the Rig Veda hardly mentions any of these
    as castes, let alone all four together.

[^106]: The Buddha gives a rationalist critique of Vedic myth (see also
    [MN 93:5.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#5.9)), the
    fairness of which is not easy to assess. Within the Brahmanical
    world, especially the progressive Kosalan brahmins to whom
    Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja belonged, there
    had been a shift towards a more nuanced symbolic understanding of
    such claims. Yet the subtle distinctions of the philosophers rarely
    influence the more straightforward beliefs of the common
    practitioner.

[^107]: "Dark" (*kaṇha*) and "bright" (or "light", *sukka*)
    are redefined in ethical not racial terms.

[^108]: Vedic theory claimed that the caste system was part of the order
    of nature (*dhamma*) established by Brahmā, and hence
    to follow the obligations of caste was a duty (also *dhamma*). The
    Buddha posited a higher "principle" (*dhamma*) beyond caste. The
    English word "principle" carries the senses of a fundamental law; a
    code of conduct; a devotion to right living; a source; and an
    underlying faculty, all of which are aspects of *dhamma* in this
    passage.

[^109]: A great king such as Pasenadi ruled his central realm, while
    outlying districts pledged allegiance to him, enjoying royal
    protection while ceding some sovereignty. It is the same
    relationship described for the kingdoms subsumed under the
    Wheel-Turning Monarch (eg. [DN
    17:1.9.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.9.5)). The
    Buddha described his people as natives among the Kosalans at [Snp
    3.1:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.1/en/sujato#18.4).

[^110]: The Mahāsaṅgīti reading *na naṁ*
    yields a better sense than the PTS *nanu*, which would make this a
    question.

[^111]: Vāseṭṭha was said to be a high family, while
    Bhāradvāja was low ([Bu Pc
    2:2.1.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc2/en/sujato#2.1.18)).

[^112]: The Buddha adapts the Brahmanical rhetoric of birth from the
    "mouth of Brahmā". Having criticized them for taking
    this literally he employs it in a metaphorical sense.

[^113]: "The embodiment of principle" is *dhammakāya*. This
    is a term of unique occurrence in the suttas, which was seized on in
    later days to posit a metaphysical theory of a quasi-eternal Buddha.
    In the suttas, it means that he, having practiced the Dhamma to its
    fullest, embodies the qualities of the Dhamma to the highest degree.

[^114]: Here begins the story of origins. The Buddha begins his creation
    myth with the end of the world. For this passage, compare [DN
    1:2.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.2.1).

[^115]: In the Brahmajālasutta, beings pass from one
    Brahmā realm to another, but when they come to this
    world it is as a human. Here we have a different perspective, where
    beings apparently still like the Brahmā gods exist in
    the physical realm.

[^116]: The role of food is critical throughout this narrative. Food is
    a fundamental sustenance on which all creatures must rely, and the
    nature of the food reflects the type of creature that eats it.
    Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.5.1 says the highest
    form of self is made of bliss (*ātmā
    ānandamaya*).

[^117]: Creation myths often begin with a dark, formless world of water,
    and describe the emergence of divisions and structures of the world.
    They do not differentiate the physical, biological, ecological, or
    social, as such distinctions came later.

[^118]: Throughout, the discourse has a special interest in tracing the
    origins of language and how different usages came about. Here the
    term "beings" is presented as a natural choice: they are "beings"
    because they are alive. Later, words are selected to convey a
    certain political or moral stance.

[^119]: The reading and sense of *samatani* is obscure. I think it is
    connected with *santānaka* in the next line, in the
    sense of "networks" or tendrils appearing in the water as it
    curdles. The Sanskrit at SF 277 and Mūlasarvāstvāda
    Vinaya 17 has *saṁmūrcchitaḥ saṁtanoti*
    ("curdled tendrils"). \| *Rasapathavī* ("earth's
    nectar") is also obscure. We would expect *pathavīrasa*
    (cp. *phalarasa* "fruit juice", etc.), which is indeed found at [SN
    5.9:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn5.9/en/sujato#5.3) in the sense
    "nutriments in soil". Since this reading also appears here in the
    Sanskrit sources, I assume it is the correct sense. For another
    example of a *tappurisa* compound with reversed order, see [DN
    4:6.46](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#6.46).

[^120]: *Khuddā* (literally "small one") is said to be a
    species of small bee, also known in Sanskrit as
    *kṣudrā*. The "dwarf bee" (*apis florea*) fits the
    bill, as it is a small wild honeybee found in India.

[^121]: Ghee and honey were among the finest offerings to the gods. The
    soma was often described as "honeyed". Our text is suggesting that
    the Vedic sacrifices led to the corruption of divinity.

[^122]: For *acchadesi* read *assādesi* ("enjoyed") after
    Mu Kd 17's *āsvādayati*. The commentary explains
    *acchadesi* as "becomes suffused", so if it is a misreading it is an
    old one.

[^123]: At [DN 26:17.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#17.2) it
    is the ugly ones who are at fault for jealousy.

[^124]: This is another veiled critique of the Vedic tradition. In [DN
    13:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#13.1) the Buddha
    told Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja the Vedas
    were recited by people who did not understand them. This problem was
    well understood within the tradition of the Brāhmaṇas
    and Upaniṣads, which constantly emphasized that they
    are effective for "one who knows this" (*ya evam veda*).

[^125]: "Fungus" is *pappaṭaka* (Sanskrit
    *parpaṭaka*). At [Bu Pj
    1:2.2.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#2.2.5),
    Moggallāna suggests that, to alleviate famine, the
    monks might eat the *pappaṭakojaṁ* ("fungus-nutrition")
    under the earth. Given that it is compared to a mushroom, I think it
    is the fungal mycelia of a mycorrhizal network. Such fungi spread
    like tendrils underground, sometimes appearing above the surface,
    sharing nutrients and information between organisms.

[^126]: Readings and meaning of *padālatā* are uncertain.
    It has usually been understood that the second element is
    *latā* ("creeper"). But this leaves *padā*
    unexplained, and the commentary's gloss of *bhaddālatā*
    is unconvincing. It also leaves unexplained the connection with
    *kalambukā*. This is probably the fruit of the kadam
    tree---fleshy, yellow-orange capsules with about 8000 seeds that
    split apart when ripe. I think *padālatā* is related to
    *padālana* in the sense of "bursting": a seed pod that
    splits open like a fig or pomegranate.

[^127]: The commentary to [Bu Pj
    1:10.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#10.6.1)
    explains "male characteristics" as "beard and whiskers, etc."
    (*massudāṭhikādi*), so this is not just genitals but
    also secondary sex characteristics.

[^128]: Pali *seṭṭhi* is explained by the commentary as
    "ash" (*chārikā*), although this sense does not seem to
    be attested anywhere else. Mahāvastu has
    *leṣṭu* while Mu Kd 17 has *loṣṭa*, both
    explained as "clod". Given that it is easier to throw a clod than
    ash, I think these probably convey the correct sense.

[^129]: *Nassa* could mean "die!" or "get lost". I take the softer
    meaning, as killing has not yet appeared among these beings. \| This
    behavior looks much like scapegoating rituals, where certain members
    of the community are deemed to bear the sins of all and are
    sacrificed to erase the sin. Often the victim was expelled from the
    community, temporarily or permanently.

[^130]: Mob shaming over perceived sexual transgression is the most
    primitive form of moralizing.

[^131]: "Carrying off" (*nibbuyhamānā*) like being swept
    away by a river. Mu Kd 17 says they throw powder, scent, garlands,
    and nets, while wishing the bride happiness and well-being.

[^132]: "Unprincipled" is *adhamma*. In the past the lovers were
    spurned, now they are celebrated in marriage.

[^133]: The sight of others having sex provokes strong reactions of
    arousal, jealousy, and disgust, often leading to violence. A culture
    of sexual modesty regulates these emotions, promoting the growth of
    larger societal structures.

[^134]: Human society evolves first from greed, second from sexual
    desire, and third from laziness. The effort to avoid manual labor
    drives cultural and technological innovation.

[^135]: Humans are focused on short term comforts and ignore long term
    consequences.

[^136]: The wild grasses used as grains evolve in adaptation to human
    needs.

[^137]: The beings tell their story within the story. The oldest myths,
    such as the Vedas or Gilgamesh, speak of myths that were already
    ancient for them. And the oldest story of all is the Fall: the death
    of God, the recession of divinity, how things were better in the old
    days. The story is a reckoning with the consequences of their
    actions, yet it is not sufficient for them to change course.

[^138]: Scarcity has arisen because of greed, giving rise to agriculture
    and land ownership. Up until now, the changes have been driven by
    individual choice, whereas now they are starting to make agreements
    among themselves, hoping to mitigate the irresponsibility of
    individuals.

[^139]: With ownership and inequality come theft.

[^140]: It turns out that moral scolding does not deter wrong-doers.

[^141]: The mob violence escalates.

[^142]: All a direct consequence of thoughtless greed and inequality.

[^143]: "Accuse" is *khīyeyya*. Here the beings are taking
    charge of their social evolution, deciding among themselves how to
    manage their society. They are active agents in their own story, not
    merely passive subjects of evolution. And the primary decision they
    make is to form a democracy by election (*sammata*). Doing so, they
    create a two-class system: rulers and subjects.

[^144]: The origin of upper class, white-collar workers who do not have
    to till the soil. Taxes are not coerced, but voluntarily offered in
    recognition of services rendered.

[^145]: The emphasis on appearance reflects a wider acknowledgement of
    the potency of beauty in shaping human conduct. The Buddha rejected
    the notion that beauty indicates worth (eg. [SN
    21.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.6/en/sujato)), yet was himself
    regarded as especially beautiful. Unfair it may be, but beautiful
    people are listened to.

[^146]: The *ehi* formula echoes the original ordination method ([Kd
    1:6.32.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#6.32.3)).

[^147]: "Applied to them" (*upanibbattaṁ*) is unique. The
    Sanskrit texts have *saṁjñodapādi*, "arisen by
    agreement". It is distinct from [DN
    27:11.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#11.2) above, where
    beings "come to be called" beings (*saṅkhyaṁ
    gacchanti*). Clearly it cannot mean the first word that appeared. I
    take it to mean this was a specialized term invented and applied
    just for them. The commentary says, *na kevalaṁ
    akkharameva*, "not just a universal term".

[^148]: "Aristocrat" (*khattiya*; Sanskrit *kṣatriya*) is
    related to *khatta* ("authority", "power"; in eg. Rig Veda 8.25.8 it
    is an adjective, "powerful"), hence "ruling class". The sutta,
    however, relates it to *khetta*, "field". The two senses possibly
    stem from the same root *kṣi* in the sense "owner",
    "master" with the "field" being the dominion owned by the chief. In
    Pali suttas, the primary connotation of the *khattiya* was of an
    aristocratic land-owning class, so the connection with "field" is
    apt. *Khattiyas* are often said to be a "warrior" caste, but that is
    not a primary association in the suttas. They are rarely depicted as
    having anything to do with the military, which had become
    professionalized by the time of the Buddha. Nonetheless, at [MN
    96:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.7) a
    *khattiya's* wealth is said to be the bow and arrow. At [SN
    3.24](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.24/en/sujato), the Buddha argues
    that someone from any caste could be as proficient a warrior as
    someone from the *khattiya* class.

[^149]: Modern linguists trace the Proto-Indo-European root of
    *rāja* as *\*reg* in the sense "one who leads people in
    a straight line", literally "ruler" or "regulator". The pun
    *rañjeti* ("they please") is meant to emphasize the
    obligations that a ruler has for their people. As here,
    *rājā* and *khattiya* can have the same meaning,
    although commonly a *rājā* is an actual king or chief,
    while *khattiya* is the class from which the rulers come.

[^150]: Read *bāheyyāma*.

[^151]: *Bāhenti* ("set aside") sounds a bit like
    *brāhmaṇa*. Such puns which don't quite land are
    sometimes used to infer a language underlying Pali.
    *Brāhmaṇa* is a Sanskrit form, and the colloquial
    pronunciation may have been closer to *bāhmaṇa*.

[^152]: The phrase *jhāyanti vītaṅgārā
    vītadhūmā pannamusalā* works at a double
    level. *Jhāyanti* is to "meditate" but also is the
    light of a lamp. *Vītaṅgārā vītadhūmā*
    means "without coals and smoke", implying that they do not light
    cooking fires; but as meditation it means their minds are free of
    corruptions. *Pannamusalā* is "with shovel put down",
    i.e. they do not dig the soil (thus killing the creatures there).
    Not cooking or digging are also precepts for Buddhist and Jain
    mendicants.

[^153]: "Meditator" is *jhāyaka*.

[^154]: At [DN 3:2.3.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#2.3.11)
    the brahmins come down from the forest and set up shrines in the
    town. Chāndogya Upaniṣad 5.10.1--5
    compares the forest contemplatives destined for the
    Brahmā realm with the ritualists who are reborn on the
    moon before returning to earth. \| The "texts" (*ganthe*) were the
    Vedas.

[^155]: *Ajjhāyaka* is from *ajjhāyati* ("to
    recite"), but here it is punned as the negative of
    *jhāyaka* ("meditator").

[^156]: "Various" is *visu*, which loosely echoes *vessa* ("peasant").
    The Sanskrit form is *vaiśya*, from *viś*,
    to "stay" or "settle" on the land. They were probably originally
    peasants who over time transitioned into more diverse livelihoods.
    In [MN 96:10.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.10) they
    are said to engage in cattle-rearing and agriculture, and over time
    trade was added to that.

[^157]: *Sudda* ("menial") rhymes with *ludda* ("hunter") and *khudda*
    ("minor"). In [MN
    96:10.14](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#10.14) their
    wealth is said to come from the "scythe and flail", i.e. seasonal
    manual labor such as threshing grain ([SN
    35.248:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.248/en/sujato#1.2)). At
    [MN 96:16.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn96/en/sujato#16.4),
    bamboo-workers, chariot-makers, and waste-collectors are cited as
    other low-class jobs. They may have originated as a distinct branch
    of Aryan peoples who were assimilated into Vedic culture (Ram Sharan
    Sharma, *Śudras in Ancient India*, 37).

[^158]: "Vocation" is *dhamma*, which is rarely used in the suttas in
    this sense; normally it is universal.

[^159]: The Buddha invokes Brahmā to support his contention
    that his own caste, the *khattiyas*, were superior, a sequence
    supported by Pañcaviṁśa Brāhmaṇa 13.4.7.
    Ultimately, however, the Buddha rejected the notion that caste tells
    us anything intrinsic about the worth of people.

