## DN 10 With Subha *Subhasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying
near Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. It was not long after the Buddha had become fully
quenched.[^574]

Now at that time the student Subha, Todeyya's son, was residing in
Sāvatthī on some business.[^575] Then he addressed a
certain young student, "Here, young student, go to the ascetic Ānanda
and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Ask him if he is healthy
and well, nimble, strong, and living comfortably. And then say: 'Sir,
please visit the student Subha, Todeyya's son, at his home out of
sympathy.'"

"Yes, sir," replied the young student, and did as he was asked.

When he had spoken, Venerable Ānanda said to him, "It's not the right
time, young student. I have drunk a dose of medicine today.[^576] But
hopefully tomorrow I'll get a chance to visit him."

"Yes, sir," replied the young student. He went back to Subha, and told
him what had happened, adding, "This much, sir, I managed to do. At
least Mister Ānanda will take the opportunity to visit tomorrow."

Then when the night had passed, Ānanda robed up in the morning and,
taking his bowl and robe, went with Venerable Cetaka as his second monk
to Subha's home, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then Subha went up
to Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.[^577] When the greetings
and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and said to
Ānanda:

"Mister Ānanda, you were Mister Gotama's attendant. You were close to
him, living in his presence. You ought to know what things Mister Gotama
praised, and in which he encouraged, settled, and grounded all these
people. What were those things?"

"Student, the Buddha praised three spectrums of practice, and that's
what he encouraged, settled, and grounded all these people in. What
three? The entire spectrum of noble ethics, immersion, and wisdom.[^578]
These are the three spectrums of practice that the Buddha praised."

### 1. The Entire Spectrum of Ethics

"But what was that entire spectrum of noble ethics that the Buddha
praised?"

"Student, it's when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own
insight this world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities,
this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure. A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child,
or someone reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One
and reflect: 'Life at home is cramped and dirty, life gone forth is wide
open. It's not easy for someone living at home to lead the spiritual
life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell. Why don't I shave off
my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life
to homelessness?' After some time they give up a large or small fortune,
and a large or small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress
in ocher robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness. Once
they've gone forth, they live restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. They act skillfully by body and speech. They're purified in
livelihood and accomplished in ethical conduct. They guard the sense
doors, have mindfulness and situational awareness, and are content.

And how is a mendicant accomplished in ethics? It's when a mendicant
gives up killing living creatures. They renounce the rod and the sword.
They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for all living
beings. ...

This pertains to their ethics.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who, while enjoying food given in
faith, still earn a living by low lore, by wrong livelihood. This
includes rites for propitiation, for granting wishes, for ghosts, for
the earth, for rain, for property settlement, and for preparing and
consecrating house sites, and rites involving rinsing and bathing, and
oblations. It also includes administering emetics, purgatives,
expectorants, and phlegmagogues; administering ear-oils, eye
restoratives, nasal medicine, ointments, and counter-ointments; surgery
with needle and scalpel, treating children, prescribing root medicines,
and binding on herbs. They refrain from such low lore, such wrong
livelihood. ... This pertains to their ethics.

A mendicant thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their ethical restraint. It's like a king who has defeated
his enemies. He sees no danger from his foes in any quarter. A mendicant
thus accomplished in ethics sees no danger in any quarter in regards to
their ethical restraint. When they have this entire spectrum of noble
ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. That's
how a mendicant is accomplished in ethics.

This is that entire spectrum of noble ethics that the Buddha praised.
But there is still more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing, This entire spectrum of
noble ethics is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum
of ethics cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. Were
other ascetics and brahmins to see such an entire spectrum of noble
ethics in themselves, they'd be delighted with just that much: 'This is
sufficient; enough has been done. We've reached the goal of our ascetic
life. There is nothing more to be done.' And yet you say: 'But there is
still more to be done.'

### 2. The Spectrum of Immersion

But what, Mister Ānanda, was that noble spectrum of immersion that the
Buddha praised?"[^579]

"And how, student, does a mendicant guard the sense doors? When a
mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound
with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ... When
they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with
their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get
caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. When they
have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied bliss
inside themselves. That's how a mendicant guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant have mindfulness and situational awareness?
It's when a mendicant acts with situational awareness when going out and
coming back; when looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending
the limbs; when bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating,
drinking, chewing, and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when
walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping
silent. That's how a mendicant has mindfulness and situational
awareness.

And how is a mendicant content? It's when a mendicant is content with
robes to look after the body and almsfood to look after the belly.
Wherever they go, they set out taking only these things. They're like a
bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only burden. In the same way, a
mendicant is content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to
look after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. That's how a mendicant is content.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense
restraint, this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, and this
noble contentment, they frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the
root of a tree, a hill, a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a
forest, the open air, a heap of straw. After the meal, they return from
almsround, sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and establish
mindfulness in their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

Suppose a man who has gotten into debt were to apply himself to work,
and his efforts proved successful. He would pay off the original loan
and have enough left over to support his partner. Thinking about this,
he'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person who was sick, suffering, gravely ill. They'd
lose their appetite and get physically weak. But after some time they'd
recover from that illness, and regain their appetite and their strength.
Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was imprisoned in a jail. But after some time they were
released from jail, safe and sound, with no loss of wealth. Thinking
about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose a person was a bondservant. They would not be their own master,
but indentured to another, unable to go where they wish. But after some
time they'd be freed from servitude. They would be their own master, not
indentured to another, an emancipated individual able to go where they
wish. Thinking about this, they'd be filled with joy and happiness.

Suppose there was a person with wealth and property who was traveling
along a desert road, which was perilous, with nothing to eat. But after
some time they crossed over the desert safely, arriving within a
village, a sanctuary free of peril. Thinking about this, they'd be
filled with joy and happiness.

In the same way, as long as these five hindrances are not given up
inside themselves, a mendicant regards them as a debt, a disease, a
prison, slavery, and a desert crossing.

But when these five hindrances are given up inside themselves, a
mendicant regards this as freedom from debt, good health, release from
prison, emancipation, and a place of sanctuary at last.

Seeing that the hindrances have been given up in them, joy springs up.
Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the
body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And
when blissful, the mind becomes immersed.

Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with
rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the body that's
not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

It's like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. This
pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born
of immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion.

It's like a deep lake fed by spring water. There's no inlet to the east,
west, north, or south, and the heavens would not properly bestow showers
from time to time. But the stream of cool water welling up in the lake
drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads throughout the lake. There's no
part of the lake that's not spread through with cool water.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of immersion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of immersion. This
pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They
drench, steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of
rapture.

It's like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some
of them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not soaked
with cool water.

In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with bliss free of rapture. There's no part of the body that's not
spread with bliss free of rapture. This pertains to their immersion.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They sit
spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part of
the body that's not spread with pure bright mind.

It's like someone sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth.
There's no part of the body that's not spread over with white cloth.

In the same way, a mendicant sits spreading their body through with pure
bright mind. There's no part of their body that's not spread with pure
bright mind. This pertains to their immersion.

This is that noble spectrum of immersion that the Buddha praised. But
there is still more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing! This noble spectrum of
immersion is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum of
immersion cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. Were
other ascetics and brahmins to see such a complete spectrum of noble
immersion in themselves, they'd be delighted with just that much: 'This
is sufficient; enough has been done. We've reached the goal of our
ascetic life. There is nothing more to be done.' And yet you say: 'But
there is still more to be done.'

### 3. The Spectrum of Wisdom

But what, Mister Ānanda, was that spectrum of noble wisdom that the
Buddha praised?"

"When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge and vision. They understand: 'This body of mine is
formed. It's made up of the four principal states, produced by mother
and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to
wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. And this
consciousness of mine is attached to it, tied to it.'

Suppose there was a beryl gem that was naturally beautiful,
eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and unclouded, endowed
with all good qualities. And it was strung with a thread of blue,
yellow, red, white, or golden brown. And someone with clear eyes were to
take it in their hand and examine it: 'This beryl gem is naturally
beautiful, eight-faceted, well-worked, transparent, clear, and
unclouded, endowed with all good qualities. And it's strung with a
thread of blue, yellow, red, white, or golden brown.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward knowledge and vision. This pertains to their
wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward the creation of a mind-made body. From this body they create
another body---formed, mind-made, whole in its major and minor limbs,
not deficient in any faculty.

Suppose a person was to draw a reed out from its sheath. They'd think:
'This is the reed, this is the sheath. The reed and the sheath are
different things. The reed has been drawn out from the sheath.' Or
suppose a person was to draw a sword out from its scabbard. They'd
think: 'This is the sword, this is the scabbard. The sword and the
scabbard are different things. The sword has been drawn out from the
scabbard.' Or suppose a person was to draw a snake out from its slough.
They'd think: 'This is the snake, this is the slough. The snake and the
slough are different things. The snake has been drawn out from the
slough.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward the creation of a mind-made body. This pertains
to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward psychic power. They wield the many kinds of psychic power:
multiplying themselves and becoming one again; appearing and
disappearing; going unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a
mountain as if through space; diving in and out of the earth as if it
were water; walking on water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged
through the sky like a bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun
and moon, so mighty and powerful; controlling the body as far as the
realm of divinity.

Suppose a deft potter or their apprentice had some well-prepared clay.
They could produce any kind of pot that they like. Or suppose a deft
ivory-carver or their apprentice had some well-prepared ivory. They
could produce any kind of ivory item that they like. Or suppose a deft
goldsmith or their apprentice had some well-prepared gold. They could
produce any kind of gold item that they like.

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward psychic power. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward clairaudience. With clairaudience that is purified and
superhuman, they hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether
near or far. Suppose there was a person traveling along the road. They'd
hear the sound of drums, clay drums, horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.
They'd think: 'That's the sound of drums,' and 'that's the sound of clay
drums,' and 'that's the sound of horns, kettledrums, and tom-toms.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward clairaudience. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward comprehending the minds of others. They understand mind with
greed as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without
greed'. They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind
with delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ...
scattered mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is
not supreme ... mind that is supreme ... immersed mind ... unimmersed
mind ... freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. If they had a spot they'd know 'I have a
spot,' and if they had no spots they'd know 'I have no spots.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward comprehending the minds of others. This pertains
to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward recollection of past lives. They recollect many kinds of past
lives, that is, one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of
the world contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of
the world contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named
this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This
was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I
passed away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I
was named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my
food. This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life
ended. When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so
they recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and
details.

Suppose a person was to leave their home village and go to another
village. From that village they'd go to yet another village. And from
that village they'd return to their home village. They'd think: 'I went
from my home village to another village. There I stood like this, sat
like that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. From that village
I went to yet another village. There too I stood like this, sat like
that, spoke like this, or kept silent like that. And from that village I
returned to my home village.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward recollection of past lives. This pertains to
their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient beings. With
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

Suppose there was a stilt longhouse at the central square. A person with
clear eyes standing there might see people entering and leaving a house,
walking along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.
They'd think: 'These are people entering and leaving a house, walking
along the streets and paths, and sitting at the central square.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
and extend it toward knowledge of the death and rebirth of sentient
beings. This pertains to their wisdom.

When their mind has become immersed in samādhi like
this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of corruptions, pliable,
workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project it and extend it
toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. They truly understand:
'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering' ... 'This is
the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the
cessation of suffering'. They truly understand: 'These are defilements'
... 'This is the origin of defilements' ... 'This is the cessation of
defilements' ... 'This is the practice that leads to the cessation of
defilements'. Knowing and seeing like this, their mind is freed from the
defilements of sensuality, desire to be reborn, and ignorance. When
they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

Suppose that in a mountain glen there was a lake that was transparent,
clear, and unclouded. A person with clear eyes standing on the bank
would see the clams and mussels, and pebbles and gravel, and schools of
fish swimming about or staying still. They'd think: 'This lake is
transparent, clear, and unclouded. And here are the clams and mussels,
and pebbles and gravel, and schools of fish swimming about or staying
still.'

In the same way, when their mind has become immersed in
samādhi like this---purified, bright, flawless, rid of
corruptions, pliable, workable, steady, and imperturbable---they project
it and extend it toward knowledge of the ending of defilements. This
pertains to their wisdom.

This is that spectrum of noble wisdom that the Buddha praised. And there
is nothing more to be done."

"It's incredible, Mister Ānanda, it's amazing! This noble spectrum of
wisdom is complete, not lacking anything! Such a complete spectrum of
wisdom cannot be seen among the other ascetics and brahmins. And there
is nothing more to be done. Excellent, Mister Ānanda! Excellent! As if
he were righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing
out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with
clear eyes can see what's there, Mister Ānanda has made the teaching
clear in many ways. I go for refuge to Mister Gotama, to the teaching,
and to the mendicant Saṅgha.[^580] From this day forth, may
Mister Ānanda remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

