###### 130 Devaduta Sutta

 The Divine Messengers

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, suppose there Were two houses with doors and
a man with good sight standing there between them saw people
going in and coming out and passing to and fro. So too, with the
divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see
beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair
and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. I understand how beings
pass on according to their actions thus: 'These worthy beings
who were well-conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers
of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right views in
their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have
reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
Or these Worthy beings who were well-conducted in body,
speech, and mind, not [179] revilers of noble ones, right in their
views, giving effect to right views in their actions, on the disso-
lution of the body, after death, have reappeared among human
beings. But these worthy beings who were ill-conducted in
body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their
views, giving effect to wrong views in their actions, on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, have reappeared in the realm
of ghosts. Or these worthy beings who were ill-conducted...on
the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in the
animal world. Or these worthy beings who were ill-
conducted... on the dissolution of the body, after death, have
reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination,
in perdition, even in hell.'

3. "Now the wardens of hell seize such a being by the arms
and present him to King Yama, [1206] saying: 'Sire, this man has ill-
treated his mother, ill-treated his father, ill-treated recluses, ill-
treated brahmins; he has had no respect for the elders of his
clan. Let the king order his punishment.'
4. "Then King Yama presses and questions and cross-questions
him about the first divine messenger: 'Good man, did you not
see the first divine messenger to appear in the world?' [1207] He
says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then King Yama says: 'Good
man, have you never seen in the world a young tender infant
lying prone, fouled in his own excrement and urine?' He says: 'I
have, venerable sir.'
"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

            - an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to birth, I
am not exempt from birth: surely I had better do good by body,
speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir, I was
negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through negli-
gence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Certainly they will deal with you according to your negligence.
But this evil action of yours was not done by your mother or
your father, [180] or by your brother or your sister, or by your
friends and companions, or by your kinsmen and relatives, or
by recluses and brahmins, or by gods: this evil action was done
by you yourself, and you yourself will experience its result.'
5. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the first divine messenger, King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the second divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the second divine messen-
ger to appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir/
Then King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the
world a man - or a woman - at eighty, ninety, or a hundred
years, aged, as crooked as a roof bracket, doubled up, supported
by a walking stick, tottering, frail, youth gone, teeth broken,
grey-haired, scanty-haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all
blotchy?' He says: 'I have, venerable sir.'
"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

            - an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to ageing, I
am not exempt from ageing: surely I had better do good by
body, speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir,
I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through

negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother...or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'
6. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the second divine messenger, King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the third divine mes-
senger: [181] 'Good man, did you not see the third divine mes-
senger to appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable
sir.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in
the world a man - or a woman - afflicted, suffering, and gravely
ill, lying fouled in his own excrement and urine, lifted up by
some and set down by others?' He says: 'I have, venerable sir.'
"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

    - an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to sickness, I
am not exempt from sickness: surely I had better do good by
body, speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir,
I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through
negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother...or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'
7. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the third divine messenger, King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the fourth divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the fourth divine messenger
to appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then
King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the world,
when a robber culprit is caught, kings having many kinds of tor-
tures inflicted on him: having him flogged with whips...(as
_Sutta 129, ยง4)...and having his head cut off with a sword?' He_
says: 'I have, venerable sir.'
"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

    - an intelligent and mature man - "Those who do evil actions
have such tortures of various kinds inflicted on them here and
now; [182] so what in the hereafter? Surely I had better do good
by body, speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable
sir, I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through

negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother...or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'
8. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the fourth divine messenger, King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the fifth divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the fifth divine messenger to
appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then
Bang Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the world a
man - or a woman - one-day dead, two-days dead, three-days
dead, bloated, livid, and oozing with matter?' He says: 'I have,
venerable sir.'
"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

            - an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to death, I
am not exempt from death: surely I had better do good by body,
speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir, I was
negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through negli-
gence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Certainly they will deal with you according to your negligence.
But this evil action of yours was not done by your mother...or
by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself, and you
yourself will experience its result.'
9. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the fifth divine messenger, King Yama is silent.
10. "Now the wardens of hell [183] torture him with the five-
fold transfixing.[1208] They drive a red-hot iron stake through one
hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other hand,
they drive a red-hot iron stake through one foot, they drive a
red-hot iron stake through the other foot, they drive a red-hot
iron stake through his belly. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.
11. "Next the wardens of hell throw him down and pare him
with axes. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he
does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
12. "Next the wardens of hell set him with his feet up and his
head down and pare him with adzes. There he feels painful,

racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil
action has not exhausted its result.
13. "Next the wardens of hell harness him to a chariot and drive
him back and forth across burning ground, blazing and glowing.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
14. "Next the wardens of hell make him climb up and down a
great mound of burning coals, blazing and glowing. There he
feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so
long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
15. "Next the wardens of hell take him feet up and head down
and plunge him into a red-hot metal cauldron, burning, blazing,
and glowing. He is cooked there in a swirl of froth. And as he is
being cooked there in a swirl of froth, he is swept now up, now
down, and now across. There he feels painful, racking, piercing
feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.
16. "Next the wardens of hell throw him into the Great Hell.
Now as to that Great Hell, bhikkhus:

It has four corners and is built
With four doors, one set in each side,
Walled up with iron all around
And shut in with an iron roof.
Its floor as well is made of iron
And heated till it glows with fire.
The range is a full hundred leagues
Which it covers ail-pervasively.

17. "Now the flames that surge out from the Great Hell's
eastern wall dash against its western wall. The flames that surge
out from its western wall dash against [184] its eastern wall. The
flames that surge out from its northern wall dash against its
southern wall. The flames that surge out from its southern wall
dash against its northern wall. The flames that dash out from the
bottom dash against the top. And the flames that surge out from
the top dash against the bottom. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.

18. "Some time or other, bhikkhus, at the end of a long period,
there comes an occasion when the Great Hell's eastern door is
opened. He rims towards it, treading quickly. As he does so, his
outer skin burns, his inner skin burns, his flesh burns, his sinews
burn, his bones turn to smoke; and it is the same when his foot
is uplifted. When at long last he reaches the door, then it is shut.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
"Some time or other, at the end of a long period, there comes
an occasion when the Great Hell's western door is opened...
when its northern door is opened...when its southern door is
opened. He runs towards it, treading quickly...When at long
last he reaches the door, then it is shut. There he feels painful,
racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil
action has not exhausted its result.
19. "Some time or other, bhikkhus, at the end of a long period,
there comes an occasion when the Great Hell's eastern door is
opened. He rims towards it, treading quickly. As he does so, his
outer skin burns, his inner skin burns, his flesh burns, his sinews
burn, his bones turn to smoke; and it is the same when his foot
is uplifted. He comes out by that door.
20. "Immediately next to the Great Hell [185] is the vast Hell of
Excrement. He falls into that. In that Hell of Excrement needle-
mouthed creatures bore through his outer skin and bore through
his inner skin and bore through his flesh arid bore through his
sinews and bore through his bones and devour his marrow.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
21. "Immediately next to the Hell of Excrement is the vast Hell
of Hot Embers. He falls into that. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.
22. "Immediately next to the Hell of Hot Embers is the vast
Wood of Simbali Trees, a league high, bristling with thorns six-
teen finger-breadths long, burning, blazing, and glowing. They
make him climb up and down those trees. There he feels
painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as
that evil action has not exhausted its result.
23. "Immediately next to the Wood of Simbali Trees is a vast
Wood of Sword-leaf Trees. He goes into that. The leaves, stirred

by the wind, cut off his hands and cut off his feet and cut off his
hands and feet; they cut off his ears and cut off his nose and cut
off his ears and nose. There he feels painful, racking, piercing
feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.
24. "Immediately next to the Wood of Sword-leaf Trees is a
great river of caustic water. He falls into that. There he is swept
upstream and he is swept downstream and he is swept
upstream and downstream. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.
25. "Next the wardens of hell pull him out with a hook, [186]
and setting him on the ground, they ask him: 'Good man, what
do you want?' He says: 'I am hungry, venerable sirs.' Then the
wardens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs,
burning, blazing, and glowing, and they throw into his mouth a
red-hot metal ball, burning, blazing, and glowing. It burns his
lips, it burns his mouth, it burns his throat, it burns his stomach,
and it passes out below carrying with it his large and small
intestines. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he
does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
26. "Next the wardens of hell ask him: 'Good man, what do
you want?' He says: 'I am thirsty, venerable sirs.' Then the war-
dens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs, burn-
ing, blazing, and glowing, and they pour into his mouth molten
copper, burning, blazing, and glowing. It burns his lips, it burns
his mouth, it burns his throat, it burns his stomach, and it passes
out below carrying with it his large and small intestines. There
he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so
long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.
27. "Then the wardens of hell throw him back again into the
Great Hell.
28. "It has happened that King Yama thought: 'Those in the
world who do evil unwholesome actions indeed have all these
many kinds of tortures inflicted on them. Oh, that I might attain
the human state, that a Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, might appear in the world, that I might wait on
that Blessed One, that the Blessed One might teach me the
Dhamma, and that I might come to understand that Blessed
One's Dhamma!'

29. "Bhikkhus, I tell you this not as something I heard from
another recluse or brahmin. I tell you this as something that I
have actually known, seen, and discovered by myself." [187]
30. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further:

"Though warned by the divine messengers,
Full many are the negligent,
And people may sorrow long indeed
Once gone down to the lower world.
But when by the divine messengers
Good people here in this life are warned,
They do not dwell in ignorance
But practise well the noble Dhamma.
Clinging they look upon with fear
For it produces birth and death;
And by not clinging they are freed
In the destruction of birth and death.
They dwell in bliss for they are safe
And reach Nibbana here and now.
They are beyond all fear and hate;
They have escaped all suffering."



