###### 132 Anandabhaddekaratta Sutta

 Ananda and One Fortunate

 Attachment

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Now on that occasion the venerable Ananda was instructing,
urging, rousing, and encouraging [190] the bhikkhus with talk on
the Dhamma in the assembly hall. He was reciting the summary
and exposition of "One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment."
Then, in the evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation
and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on a seat made
ready and asked the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, who has been
instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the bhikkhus with
talk on the Dhamma in the assembly hall? Who has been recit-
ing the summary and exposition of 'One Who has One
Fortunate Attachment'?"
"It was the venerable Ananda, venerable sir."
Then the Blessed One asked the venerable Ananda: "Ananda,
how were you instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the
bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma, and reciting the summary
and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"
3-10. "I was doing so thus, venerable sir: [191]

'Let not a person revive the past...
_(Repeat the whole of the last sutta, §§3-10 up to:)_
Who has one fortunate attachment.'

11. "I was instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the
bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma thus, and reciting the sum-
mary and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attach-
ment' thus."
"Good, good, Ananda! It is good that you were instructing/
urging, rousing, and encouraging the bhikkhus with talk on the

Dhamma thus, and reciting the summary and exposition of 'One
Who Has One Fortunate Attachment' thus:

12-19. "Let not a person revive the past...
_(Repeat the whole of the last sutta, §§3-10 up to:)_
Who has one fortunate attachment."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
