###### 135 Culakammavibhanga Sutta

 The Shorter Exposition of Action

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's son, went to
the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. [1223] When
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one
side and asked the Blessed One:
3. "Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why
human beings are seen to be inferior and superior? For people
are seen to be short-lived and long-lived, sickly and healthy,
ugly and beautiful, uninfluential and influential, poor and
wealthy, low-born and high-born, stupid and [203] wise. What
is the cause and condition, Master Gotama, why human beings
are seen to be inferior and superior?"
4. "Student, beings are owners of their actions, heirs of their
actions; they originate from their actions, are bound to their
actions, have their actions as their refuge. It is action that distin-
guishes beings as inferior and superior."
"I do not understand in detail the meaning of Master
Gotama's statement, which he spoke in brief without expound-
ing the meaning in detail. It would be good if Master Gotama
would teach me the Dhamma so that I might understand in
detail the meaning of Master Gotama's statement."
"Then, student, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."
"Yes, sir," the brahmin student Subha replied. The Blessed
One said this:
5. "Here, student, some man or woman kills living beings and
is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, mer-
ciless to living beings. Because of performing and undertaking
such action, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reap-
pears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in

perdition, even in hell. But if on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he does not reappear in a state of deprivation, in an
unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell, but instead comes
back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is short-
lived.[1224] This is the way, student, that leads to short life, namely,
one kills living being and is murderous, bloody-handed, given
to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
6. "But here, student, some man or woman, abandoning the
killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with
rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides com-
passionate to all living beings. Because of performing and
undertaking such action, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. But if on the dissolution of the body, after death, he does
not reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world, but
instead comes back to the human state, then wherever he is
reborn he is long-lived.[1225] This is the way, student, that leads to
long life, namely, abandoning the killing of living beings, [204]
one abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon
laid aside, gentle and kindly, one abides compassionate to all
living beings.
7. "Here, student, some man or woman is given to injuring
beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
Because of performing and undertaking such action, on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of
deprivation...But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is sickly. This is the way, student,
that leads to sickliness, namely, one is given to injuring beings
with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
8. "But here, student, some man or woman is not given to
injuring beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a
knife. Because of performing and undertaking such action, on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy
destination...But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is healthy. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to health, namely, one is not given to injuring
beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
9. "Here, student, some man or woman is of an angry and irri-
table character; even when criticised a little, he is offended,
becomes angry, hostile, and resentful, and displays anger, hate,

and bitterness. Because of performing and undertaking such
action.. .he reappears in a state of deprivation.. .But if instead he
comes back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is
ugly. This is the way, student, that leads to ugliness, namely,
one is of an angry and irritable character...and displays anger,
hate, and bitterness.
10. "But here, student, some man or woman is not of an angry
and irritable character; even when criticised a little, he is not
offended, does not become angry, hostile, and resentful, and
does not display anger, hate, and bitterness. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action.. .he reappears in a happy
destination.. .But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is beautiful. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to being beautiful, namely, one is not of an
angry and irritable character...and does not display anger, hate,
and bitterness.
11. "Here, student, some man or woman is envious, one who
envies, resents, and begrudges the gains, honour, respect, rever-
ence, salutations, and veneration received by others. Because of
performing and undertaking such action...he reappears in a
state of deprivation...But if instead he comes back to the human
state, then wherever he is reborn he is uninfluential. This is the
way, student, that leads to being uninfluential, namely, one is
envious...towards the gains, honour, respect, reverence, saluta-
tions, and veneration received by others. [205]
12. "But here, student, some man or woman is not envious,
one who does not envy, resent, and begrudge the gains, honour,
respect, reverence, salutations, and veneration received by others.
Because of performing and undertaking such action.. .he reap-
pears in a happy destination...But if instead he comes back to
the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is influential.
This is the way, student, that leads to being influential, namely,
one is not envious...towards the gains, honour, respect, rever-
ence, salutations, and veneration received by others.
13. "Here, student, some man or woman does not give food,
drink, clothing, carriages, garlands, scents, unguents, beds,
dwelling, and lamps to recluses or brahmins. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action.. .he reappears in a state of
deprivation.. .But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is poor. This is the way, student,

that leads to poverty, namely, one does not give food...and
lamps to recluses or brahmins.
14. "But here, student, some man or woman gives food...and
lamps to recluses or brahmins. Because of performing and
undertaking such action...he reappears in a happy destina-
tion... But if instead he comes back to the human state, then
wherever he is reborn he is wealthy. This is the way, student,
that leads to wealth, namely, one gives food...and lamps to
recluses or brahmins.
15. "Here, student, some man or woman is obstinate and arro-
gant; he does not pay homage to one who should receive
homage, does not rise up for one in whose presence he should
rise up, does not offer a seat to one who deserves a seat, does
not make way for one for whom he should make way, and does
not honour, respect, revere, and venerate one who should be
honoured, respected, revered, and venerated. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action.. .he reappears in a state of
deprivation...But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is low-born. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to low birth, namely, one is obstinate and arro-
gant... and does not honour, respect, revere, and venerate one
who should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.
16. "But here, student, some man or woman is not obstinate
and arrogant; he pays homage to one who should receive
homage, rises up for one in whose presence he should rise up,
offers a seat to one who deserves a seat, makes way for one for
whom he should make way, and honours, respects, reveres, and
venerates one who should be honoured, respected, revered, and
venerated. Because of performing and undertaking such
action...he reappears in a happy destination...But if instead he
comes back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is
high-born. This is the way, student, that leads to high birth,
namely, one is not obstinate and arrogant...and honours,
respects, reveres, and venerates one who should be honoured,
respected, revered, and venerated.
17. "Here, student, some man or woman does not visit a
recluse or a brahmin and ask: 'Venerable sir, what is whole-
some? What is unwholesome? What is blameable? What is
blameless? What should be cultivated? What should not be cul-
tivated? What kind of action will lead to my harm and suffering
for a long time? What kind of action will lead to my welfare and

happiness for a long time?' Because of performing and under-
taking such action.. .he reappears in a state of deprivation.. .But
if instead he comes back to the human state, then wherever he is
reborn he is stupid. This is the way, student, that leads to stu-
pidity, namely, one does not visit a recluse or brahmin and ask
such questions. [206]
18. "But here, student, some man or woman visits a recluse or
a brahmin and asks: 'Venerable sir, what is wholesome?...What
kind of action will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long
time?' Because of performing and undertaking such action.. .he
reappears in a happy destination...But if instead he comes back
to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is wise. This is
the way, student, that leads to wisdom, namely, one visits a
recluse or brahmin and asks such questions.
19. "Thus, student, the way that leads to short life makes peo-
ple short-lived, the way that leads to long life makes people
long-lived; the way that leads to sickliness makes people sickly,
the way that leads to health makes people healthy; the way that
leads to ugliness makes people ugly, the way that leads to being
beautiful makes people beautiful; the way that leads to being
uninfluential makes people uninfluential, the way that leads to
being influential makes people influential; the way that leads to
poverty makes people poor, the way that leads to wealth makes
people wealthy; the way that leads to low birth makes people
low-born, the way that leads to high birth makes people high-
born; the way that leads to stupidity makes people stupid, the
way that leads to wisdom makes people wise.
20. "Beings are owners of their actions, student, heirs of their
actions; they originate from their actions, are bound to their
actions, have their actions as their refuge. It is action that distin-
guishes beings as inferior and superior."
21. When this was said, the brahmin student Subha,
Todeyya's son, said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower
who has gone to him for refuge for life."
