###### 136 Mahakammavibhanga Sutta

 The Greater Exposition of Action

[207] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.
2. Now on that occasion the venerable Samiddhi was living in
a forest hut. Then the wanderer Potaliputta, while wandering
and walking for exercise, went to the venerable Samiddhi arid
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the
venerable Samiddhi:
"Friend Samiddhi, I heard and learned this from the recluse
Gotama's own lips: 'Bodily action is vain, verbal action is vain,
only r ental action is real.' And: 'There is that attainment on
ente' ig which one does not feel anything at all.'" [1226 ]

"Do not say so, friend Potaliputta, do not say so. Do not mis-
represent the Blessed .One; it is not good to misrepresent the
Blessed One. The Blessed One would not speak thus: 'Bodily
action is vain, verbal action is vain, only mental action is real.'
But, friend, there is that attainment on entering which one does
not feel anything at all."
"How long is it since you went forth, friend Samiddhi?"
"Not long, friend: three years."
"There now, what shall we say to the elder bhikkhus when a
young bhikkhu thinks the Teacher is to be defended thus?
Friend Samiddhi, having done an intentional action by way of
body, speech, or mind, what does one feel?"
"Having done an intentional action by way of body, speech,
or mind, one feels suffering, friend Potaliputta."
Then, neither approving nor disapproving of the venerable
Samiddhi's words, the wanderer Potaliputta rose from his seat
and departed.

3. Soon after the wanderer Potaliputta had left, the venerable
Samiddhi went to the venerable Ananda [208] and exchanged
greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side and reported to the venerable
Ananda his entire conversation with the wanderer Potaliputta.
After he had spoken, the venerable Ananda told him: "Friend
Samiddhi, this conversation should be told to the Blessed One.
Come, let us approach the Blessed One and tell him this. As the
Blessed One explains to us, so we shall bear it in mind." - "Yes,
friend," the venerable Samiddhi replied.
4. Then the venerable Ananda and the venerable Samiddhi
went together to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to
him, they sat down at one side. The venerable Ananda reported
to the Blessed One the entire conversation between the vener-
able Samiddhi and the wanderer Potaliputta.
5. When he had finished, the Blessed One told the venerable
Ananda: "Ananda, I do not even recall ever having seen the
wanderer Potaliputta, so how could there have been this conver-
sation? Though the wanderer Potaliputta's question should
have been analysed before being answered, this misguided man
answered it one-sidedly."
6. When this was said, the venerable Udayin said to the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, perhaps the venerable Samiddhi spoke thus
referring to [the principle]: 'Whatever is felt is suffering.'"[1227 ]

Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ananda: "See,
Ananda, how this misguided man Udayin interferes. I knew,
Ananda, that this misguided man Udayin would unduly inter-
fere right now. From the start the wanderer Potaliputta had
asked about the three kinds of feeling. This misguided man
Samiddhi [209] would have answered the wanderer Potaliputta
rightly if, when asked thus, he would have explained: 'Friend
Potaliputta, having done an intentional action by way of body,
speech, or mind [whose result is] to be felt as pleasant, one feels
pleasure. Having done an intentional action by way of body,
speech, or mind [whose result is] to be felt as painful, one feels
pain. Having done an intentional action by way of body, speech,
or mind [whose result is] to be felt as neither-pain-nor-pleasure,
one feels neither-pain-nor-pleasure.' But who are these foolish,
thoughtless wanderers of other sects, that they could under-
stand the Tathagata's great exposition of action? You should

1060 Mahakammavtbhanga Sutta: Sutta 136 iii 210

listen, Ananda, to the Tathagata as he expounds the great expo-
sition of action. "
7. "This is the time, Blessed One, this is the time, Sublime One,
for the Blessed One to expound the great exposition of action.
Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will
remember it."
"Then listen, Ananda, and attend closely to what I shall say."
"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ananda replied. The
Blessed One said this:
8. "Ananda, [1228] there are four kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world. What four? Here some person kills living
beings, takes what is not given, misconducts himself in sensual
pleasures, speaks falsehood, speaks maliciously, speaks harshly,
gossips; he is covetous, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears
in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdi-
tion, even in hell.
"But here some person kills living beings...and holds wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears
in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
"Here some person abstains from killing living beings, from
taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures,
from false speech, from malicious speech, [210] from harsh
speech, from gossip; he is not covetous, his mind is without ill
will, and he holds right view. On the dissolution of the body,
after death, he reappears in a. happy destination, even in the
heavenly world.
"But here some person abstains from killing living beings...
and he holds right view. On the dissolution of the body, after
death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy des-
tination, in perdition, even in hell.
9. "Here, Ananda, by means of ardour, endeavour, devotion,
diligence, and right attention, some recluse or brahmin attains
such concentration of mind that, when his mind is concentrated,
with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human,
he sees that person here who kills living beings...and holds
wrong view, and he sees that on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an
unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are evil actions, there is result of misconduct; for I

iii 2 _The rer_ _Exposition of Action 1061_

saw a person here who killed living beings...and held wrong
view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death,
he has reappeared in a state of deprivation...even in hell.' He
says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone
who kills living beings...and holds wrong view reappears in a
state of deprivation...even in hell. Those who know thus know
rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.' Thus he obsti-
nately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discov-
ered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong.'
10. "But here, Ananda, [211] by means of ardour...some
recluse or brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that,
when his mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is
purified and surpasses the human, he sees that person here who
kills living beings.. .and holds wrong view, and he sees that on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a
happy destination, even in the heavenly world. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are no evil actions, there is no result of miscon-
duct; for I saw a person here who killed living beings.. .and held
wrong view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world.' He says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body,
after death, everyone who kills living beings...and holds wrong
view reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. Those who know thus know rightly; those who think
otherwise are mistaken.' Thus he obstinately adheres to what he
himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is
true, anything else is wrong.'

11. "Here, Ananda, by means of ardour...some recluse or
brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that, when his
mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is purified and
surpasses the human, he sees that person here who abstains
from killing living beings...and holds right view, and he sees
that on the dissolution of tire body, after death, he has reappeared
in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are good actions, there is result of good conduct;
for I saw a person here who abstained from killing living
beings...and held right view, and I see that on the dissolution of
the body, after death, he has reappeared in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world.' He says thus: 'On the dissolution of
the body, after death, everyone who abstains from killing living

13. "Therein, Ananda, [1229] when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are evil 'actions, there is result of misconduct/ I
grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person here who killed
living beings...and held wrong view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of
deprivation...even in hell/ I also grant him this. But when he
says: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone who
kills living beings...and holds wrong view reappears in a state
of deprivation...even in hell,' I do not grant him this. And
when he says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who
think otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.


beings...and holds right view reappears in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world. Those who know thus know right-
ly; those who think otherwise are mistaken/ Thus he obstinately
adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered,
insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong.'
12. "But here, Ananda, [212] by means of ardour...some
recluse or brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that,
when his mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is
purified and surpasses the human, he sees that person here who
abstains from killing living beings...and holds right view, and
he sees that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reap-
pears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell. He says thus: 'Indeed, there are no good
actions, there is no result of good conduct; for I saw a person
here who abstained from killing living beings...and held right
view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death,
he has reappeared in a state of deprivation...even in hell.' He
says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone
who abstains from killing living beings...and holds right view
reappears in a state of deprivation...even in hell. Those who
know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mis-
taken.' Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has
known, seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, any-
thing else is wrong.'

13. "Therein, Ananda, [1229] when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are evil 'actions, there is result of misconduct/ I
grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person here who killed
living beings...and held wrong view, and I see that on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of
deprivation...even in hell/ I also grant him this. But when he
says: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone who
kills living beings...and holds wrong view reappears in a state
of deprivation...even in hell,' I do not grant him this. And
when he says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who
think otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.

14. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are no evil actions, there is no result of miscon-
duct,' I do not grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person
here who killed living beings.. .and held wrong view, and I see
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world/ I
grant him this. But when he says: "On the dissolution of the
body, after death, everyone who kills living beings...and holds
wrong view reappears in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world/ [213] I do not grant him this. And when he
says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who think
otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.
15. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are good actions, there is result of good conduct,'
I grant him this. And when he says: 'I saw a person here who
abstained from killing living beings...and held right view, and I
see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world/ I
also grant him this. But when he says: 'On the dissolution of
the body, after death, everyone who abstains from killing living
beings...and holds right view reappears in a happy destina-
tion, even in the heavenly world/ I do not grant him this. And
when he says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who
think otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.
16. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are no good actions, there is no result of good con-
duct/ I do not grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person here
who abstained from killing living beings...and held right view,
and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has
reappeared in a state of deprivation...even in hell/ I grant him

this. But when he says: 'On the dissolution of the body, after
death, everyone who abstains from killing living beings...and
holds right view reappears in a state of deprivation...even in
hell,' I do not grant him this. And when he says: [214] 'Those
who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are
mistaken,' I also do not grant him this. And when he obstinately
adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered,
insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong,' I also do not
grant him this. Why is that? Because, Ananda, the Tathagata's
knowledge of the great exposition of action is otherwise.
17. "Therein, Ananda,[1230] as to the person here who kills living
beings...and holds wrong view, and on the dissolution of the
body, after death, reappears in a state of deprivation...even in
hell: either earlier he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or
later he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or at the time of
death he acquired and undertook wrong view. [1231] Because of
that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a state of deprivation...even in hell. And since he has
here killed living beings...and held wrong view, he will experi-
ence the result of that either here and now, or in his next rebirth,
or in some subsequent existence.[1232 ]

18. "Therein, Ananda, as to the person here who kills living
beings...and holds wrong view, and on thef dissolution of the
body, after death, reappears in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world: either earlier he did a good- action to be felt as
pleasant, or later he did a good action to be felt as pleasant, or at
the time of death he acquired and undertook right view. [1233 ]
Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he
has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. But since he has here killed living beings...and held
wrong view, he will experience the result of that either here and
now, or in his next rebirth, or in some subsequent existence.
19. "Therein, Ananda, as to the person here who abstains from
killing living beings...and holds right view, and on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world: either earlier he did a good action
to be felt as pleasant, or later he did a good action to be felt as
pleasant, or at the time of death he acquired and undertook
right view. Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the

heavenly world. And since he has here abstained from killing
living beings [215]...and held right view, he will experience the
result of that either here and now, or in his next rebirth, or in
some subsequent existence.
20. "Therein, Ananda, as to the person here who abstains from
killing living beings...arid holds right view, and on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in a state of depriva-
tion. . .even in hell: either earlier he did an evil action to be felt as
painful, or later he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or at
the time of death he acquired and undertook wrong view.
Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he
has reappeared in a state of deprivation...even in hell. But since
he has here abstained from killing living beings.. .and held right
view, he will experience the result of that either here and now,
or in his next rebirth, or in some subsequent existence.
21. "Thus, Ananda, there is action that is incapable [of good
result] and appears incapable; there is action that is incapable

[of good result] and appears capable; there is action that is capa-
ble [of good result] and appears capable; and there is action that
is capable [of good result] and appears incapable."[1234 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
