###### 139 Aranavibhanga Sutta

 The Exposition of Non-Conflict

[230] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir/' they replied. The Blessed One
said this:
2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of non-conflict.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable
sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:
3. "One should not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low,
vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and unbeneficial; and one should not
pursue self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and unbene-
ficial. The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata avoids both
extremes; giving vision, giving knowledge, it leads to peace, to
direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana.[1257] One should
know what it is to extol and what it is to disparage, and know-
ing both, one should neither extol nor disparage but should
teach only the Dhamma. One should know how to define plea-
sure, and knowing that, one should pursue pleasure within one-
self. One should not utter covert speech, and one should not
utter overt sharp speech. One should speak unhurriedly, not
hurriedly. One should not insist on local language, and one
should not override normal usage. This is the summary of the
exposition of non-conflict.
4. '"One should not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low,
vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and unbeneficial; and one should not
pursue self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and unbene-
ficial.' So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?
"The pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is
linked to sensual desires[1258] - low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair,

and fever, and it is the wrong way. [1 2 5 9] [231] Disengagement
from the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is
linked to sensual desires - low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state without suffering, vexation, despair,
and fever, and it is the right way.
"The pursuit of self-mortification - painful, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair,
and fever, and it is the wrong way. Disengagement from the
pursuit of self-mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial

    - is a state without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it
is the right way.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble,
and unbeneficial; and one should not pursue self-mortification,
which is painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial.'
5. '"The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata avoids both
these extremes; giving vision, giving knowledge, it leads to
peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? It is just this
Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindful-
ness, and right concentration. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: 'The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata
avoids both these extremes.. .to Nibbana.'
6. '"One should know what it is to extol and what it is to dis-
parage, and knowing both, one should neither extol nor dispar-
age but should teach only the Dhamma.' So it was said. And
with reference to what was this said?
7. "How, bhikkhus, does there come to be extolling and dis-
paraging and failure to teach only the Dhamma? When one says:
'All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose
pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low.. .and unbeneficial - are
beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have
entered upon the wrong way,' one thus disparages some. When
one says: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of the enjoyment
of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low...and
unbeneficial - are without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and they have entered upon the right way,' one thus extols some.
"When one says: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - [232] are

beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have
entered upon the wrong way,' one thus disparages some.
When one says: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - are without
suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered
upon the right way,' one thus extols some.
"When one says: 'All those who have not abandoned the fetter
of being [1260] are beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and they have entered upon the wrong way,' one thus dispar-
ages some. When one says: 'All those who have abandoned the
fetter of being are without suffering, vexation, despair, and
fever, and they have entered upon the right way,' one thus
extols some. This is how there comes to be extolling and dis-
paraging and failure to teach only the Dhamma.
8. "And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be neither
extolling nor disparaging but teaching only the Dhamma? When
one does not say: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoy-
ment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires...have
entered upon the wrong way,' but says instead: 'The pursuit is a
state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is
the wrong way,' then one teaches only the Dhamma.[1261] When
one does not say: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of the
enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual
desires...have entered upon the right way,' but says instead:
'The disengagement is a state without suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and It is the right way,' then one teaches only
the Dhamma.
"When one does not say: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of
self-mortification.. .have entered upon the wrong way,' but says
instead: 'The pursuit is a state beset by suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and it is the wrong way,' then one teaches
only the Dhamma. When one does not say: 'All those disen-
gaged from the pursuit of self-mortification.. .have entered upon
the right way,' but says instead: 'The disengagement is a state
without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the
right way,' then one teaches only the Dhamma.
"When one does not say: 'All those who have not abandoned
the fetter of being...have entered upon the wrong way/ [233]
but says instead: 'As long as the fetter of being is unabandoned,
being too is unabandoned/ then one teaches only the Dhamma.

When one does not say: 'All those who have abandoned the
fetter of being...have entered upon the right way,' but says
instead: 'When the fetter of being is abandoned, being also is
abandoned,' then one teaches only the Dhamma.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
know what it is to extol and what it is to disparage, and know-
ing both, one should neither extol nor disparage but should
teach only the Dhamma.'
9. '"One should know how to define pleasure, and knowing
that, one should pursue pleasure within oneself.' So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said?
"Bhikkhus, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure.
What five? Forms cognizable by the eye...sounds cognizable by
the ear...odours cognizable by the nose...flavours cognizable by
the tongue...tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual
desire and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sen-
sual pleasure. Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on
these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure -
a filthy pleasure, a coarse pleasure, an ignoble pleasure. I say of
this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it should
not be developed, that it should not be cultivated, and that it
should be feared.
"Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana... the second jhana... the third jhana...
the fourth jhana. This is called the bliss of renunciation, the bliss
of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment. I say
of this kind of pleasure that it should be pursued, that it should
be developed, that it should be cultivated, and that it should not
be feared. [234]
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
know how to define pleasure, and knowing that, one should
pursue pleasure within oneself.'
10. '"One should not utter covert speech, and one should not
utter overt sharp speech.' So it was said. And with reference to
what was this said?
"Here, bhikkhus, when one knows covert speech to be
untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, one should on no account
utter it. When one knows covert speech to be true, correct, and

unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it. But when one knows
covert speech to be true, correct, and beneficial, one may utter it,
knowing the time to do so.
"Here, bhikkhus, when one knows overt sharp speech to be
untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, one should on no account
utter it. When one knows overt sharp speech to be true, correct,
and unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it. But when one
knows overt sharp speech to be true, correct, and beneficial, one
may utter it, knowing the time to do so.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should not
utter covert speech, and one should not utter overt sharp speech.'
11. '"One should speak unhurriedly, not hurriedly.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said?
"Here, bhikkhus, when one speaks hurriedly, one's body
grows tired and one's mind becomes excited, one's voice is
strained and one's throat becomes hoarse, and the speech of one
who speaks hurriedly is indistinct and hard to understand.
"Here, bhikkhus, when one speaks unhurriedly, one's body
does not grow tired nor does one's mind become excited, one's
voice is not strained nor does one's throat become hoarse, and
the speech of one who speaks unhurriedly is distinct and easy to
understand.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
speak unhurriedly, not hurriedly.'
12. '"One should not insist on local language, and one should
not override normal usage.' So it was said. And with reference
to what was this said?
"How, bhikkhus, does there come to be insistence on local lan-
guage and overriding of normal usage? Here, bhikkhus, in dif-
ferent localities they call the same thing a 'dish' [pati], [235] a
'bowl' [patta], a 'vessel' [vittha], a 'saucer' [serava], a 'pan' [dhar-
_opa], a 'pot' [porta],_ a 'mug' [hana] or a 'basin' [pislla]. So what-
ever they call it in such and such a locality, one speaks accord-
ingly, firmly adhering [to that expression] and insisting: 'Only
this is correct; anything else is wrong.' This is how there comes to
be insistence on local language and overriding normal usage.[1262 ]

"And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be non-insistence on
local language and non-overriding of normal usage? Here,
bhikkhus, in different localities they call the same thing a
'dish'...or a 'basin.' So whatever they call it in such and such a

locality, without adhering [to that expression] one speaks
accordingly, thinking: 'These venerable ones, it seems, are speak-
ing with reference to this.' This is how there comes to be non-
insistence on local language and non-overriding of normal usage.
"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
not insist on local language, and one should not override nor-
mal usage.'
13. "Here, bhikkhus, the pursuit of the enjoyment of one
whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low...and unbene-
ficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and it is the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, disengagement from the pursuit of the
enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires -
low...and unbeneficial - is a state without suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and it is the right way. Therefore this is a
state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, the pursuit of self-mortification - painful,
ignoble, and unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexa-
tion, despair, and fever, and it is the wrong way. Therefore this
is a state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, disengagement from the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - is a state
without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the
right way. [236] Therefore this is a state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, the Middle Way discovered by the
Tathagata avoids both these extremes; giving vision, giving
knowledge, it leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlighten-
ment, to Nibbana. It is a state without suffering...and it is the
right way. Therefore this is a state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, extolling and disparaging and failure to
teach only the Dhamma is a state beset by suffering...and it is
the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, not extolling and not disparaging and teach-
ing only the Dhamma is a state without suffering...and it is the
right way. Therefore this is a state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, sensual pleasure - a filthy pleasure, a coarse
pleasure, an ignoble pleasure - is a state beset by suffering.. .and
it is the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclu-
sion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment, is a state

without suffering...and it is the right way. Therefore this is a
state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is untrue, incorrect, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering...Therefore this is a
state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is true, correct, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering...Therefore this is a
state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is true, correct, and bene-
ficial is a state without suffering...Therefore this is a state with-
out conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech that is untrue, incorrect,
and unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering.. .Therefore this is a
state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech that is true, correct, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering...Therefore this is a
state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech [237] that is true, correct,
and beneficial is a state without suffering...Therefore this is a
state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, the speech of one who speaks hurriedly is a
state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is
the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, the speech of one who speaks unhurriedly is a
state without suffering.. .Therefore this is a state without conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, insistence on local language and overriding
of normal usage is a state beset by suffering.. .Therefore this is a
state with conflict.
"Here, bhikkhus, non-insistence on local language and non-
overriding of normal usage is a state without suffering, vexa-
tion, despair, and fever, and it is the right way. Therefore this is
a state without conflict.
14. "Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
'We shall know the state with conflict and we shall know the
state without conflict, and knowing these, we shall enter upon
the way without conflict.' Now, bhikkhus, Subhuti is a clansman
who has entered upon the way without conflict."[1263 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
