###### 146 Nandakovada Sutta

 Advice from Nandaka

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Then MahapajapatI GotamI together with five hundred
bhikkhunls went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to
the Blessed One, she stood at one side and said to him:
"Venerable sir, let the Blessed One advise the bhikkhunls, let the
Blessed One instruct the bhikkhunls, let the Blessed One give
the bhikkhunls a talk on the Dhamma."
3. Now on that occasion the elder bhikkhus were taking turns
in advising the bhikkhunls, but the venerable Nandaka did not
want to advise them when his turn came. [1318] Then the Blessed
One addressed the venerable Ananda: "Ananda, whose turn is it
today to advise the bhikkhunls?"
"Venerable sir, it is the venerable Nandaka's turn to advise the
bhikkhunls, but he doestnot want to advise them even though it
is his turn."
4. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Nandaka:
"Advise the bhikkhunls, Nandaka. Instruct the bhikkhunls,
Nandaka. Give the bhikkhunls a talk on the Dhamma, brahmin."
"Yes, venerable sir," [271] the venerable Nandaka replied.
Then, in the morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed, and tak-
ing his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI for alms. When
he had wandered for alms in SavatthI and had returned from his
almsround, after his meal he went with a companion to the
Rajaka Park. The bhikkhunls saw the venerable Nandaka com-
ing in the distance and prepared a seat and set out water for the
feet. The venerable Nandaka sat down on the seat made ready
and washed his feet. The bhikkhunls paid homage to him and
sat down at one side. When they were seated, the venerable
Nandaka told the bhikkhunls:

5. "Sisters, this talk will be in the form of questions. When you
understand you should say: 'We understand'; when you do not
understand you should say: 'We do not understand'; when you
are doubtful or perplexed you should ask me: 'How is this,
venerable sir? What is the meaning of this?'"
"Venerable sir, we are satisfied and pleased with the master
Nandaka for inviting us in this way."
6. "Sisters, what do you think? Is the eye permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imper-
manent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." -
"Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" -
"No, venerable sir."
"Sisters, what do you think? Is the ear...the nose...the
tongue...the body...the mind permanent or impermanent?" -
"Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent suf-
fering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is what is
impermanent, suffering, [272] and subject to change fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No,
venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we have
already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'These six internal bases are impermanent.'"[1319 ]

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
7. "Sisters, what do you think? Are forms...sounds...odours...
flavours...tangibles...mind-objects permanent or imperma-
nent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imperma-
nent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No,
venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we have
already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'These six external bases are impermanent.'"
"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
8. "Sisters, what do you think? Is eye-consciousness... [273].. .ear-
consciousness...nose-consciousness... tongue-consciousness...
body-consciousness... mind-consciousness permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is
impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable

sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change
fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?"

           - "No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we
have already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom
thus: 'These six classes of consciousness are impermanent.'"
"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
9. "Sisters, suppose an oil-lamp is burning: its oil is imperma-
nent and subject to change, its wick is impermanent and subject
to change, its flame is impermanent and subject to change, and
its radiance is impermanent and subject to change. Now would
anyone be speaking rightly who spoke thus: 'While this oil-lamp
is burning, its oil, wick, and flame are impermanent and subject
to change, but its radiance is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not
subject to change'?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, while
that oil-lamp is burning, its oil, wick, and flame are imperma-
nent and subject to change, so its radiance must be impermanent
and subject to change."
"So too, sisters, would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke
thus: 'These six internal bases are impermanent and subject to
change, but the pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling that one experiences in dependence upon the six internal
bases is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change'?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because each feeling arises in
dependence upon its corresponding condition,[1320] [274] and with
the cessation of its corresponding condition, the feeling ceases."
"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
10. "Sisters, suppose a great tree is standing possessed of
heartwood: its root is impermanent and subject to change, its
trunk is impermanent and subject to change, its branches and
foliage are impermanent and subject to change, and its shadow
is impermanent and subject to change. Now would anyone be
speaking rightly who spoke thus: 'The root, trunk, branches,
and foliage of this great tree standing possessed of heartwood
are impermanent and subject to change, but its shadow is per-
manent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change'?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, the
root, trunk, branches, and foliage of this great tree standing

possessed of heartwood are impermanent and subject to change,
so its shadow must be impermanent and subject to change."
"So too, sisters, would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke
thus: 'These six external bases are impermanent and subject to
change, but the pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling that one experiences in dependence upon the six external
bases is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change'?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because each feeling arises in
dependence upon its corresponding condition, and with the ces-
sation of its corresponding condition, the feeling ceases."
"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.
11. "Sisters, suppose a skilled butcher or his apprentice were
to kill a cow and carve it up with a sharp butcher's knife.
Without damaging the inner mass of flesh and without damag-
ing the outer hide, he would cut, sever, and carve away the
inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments with the sharp butcher's
knife. [275] Then having cut, severed, and carved all this away,
he would remove the outer hide and cover the cow again with
that same hide. Would he be speaking rightly if he were to say:
'This cow is joined to this hide just as it was before'?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because if that skilled butcher
or his apprentice were to kill a cow...and cut, sever, and carve
all that away, even though he covers the cow again with that
same hide and says: 'This cow is joined to this hide just as it was
before,' that cow would still be disjoined from that hide."
12. "Sisters, I have given this simile in order to convey a
meaning. This is the meaning: 'The inner mass of flesh' is a term
for the six internal bases. "The outer hide' is a term for the six
external bases. 'The inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments' is a
term for delight and lust. 'The sharp butcher's knife' is a term
for noble wisdom - the noble wisdom that cuts, severs, and
carves away the inner defilements, fetters, and bonds.
13. "Sisters, there are these seven enlightenment factors [1321 ]
through the development and cultivation of which a bhikkhu,
by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now
enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliver-
ance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the
taints. What are the seven? Here, sisters, a bhikkhu develops
the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by

seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquish-
ment. He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment fac-
tor. . .the energy enlightenment factor.. .the rapture enlightenment
factor...the tranquillity enlightenment factor...the concentration
enlightenment factor...the equanimity enlightenment factor,
which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and
ripens in relinquishment. These are the seven enlightenment fac-
tors through the development and cultivation of which a
bhikkhu, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here
and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and
deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of
the taints." [276]
14. When the venerable Nandaka had advised the bhikkhunls
thus, he dismissed them, saying: "Go, sisters, it is time." Then
the bhikkhunls, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable
Nandaka's words, rose from their seats, and after paying
homage to the venerable Nandaka, departed keeping him on
their right. They went to the Blessed One, and after paying
homage to him, stood at one side. The Blessed One told them:
"Go, sisters, it is time." Then the bhikkhunls paid homage to the
Blessed One and departed keeping him on their right.
15. Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the four-
teenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the
moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly incom-
plete, so too, those bhikkhunls are satisfied with Nandaka's teach-
ing of the Dhamma, but their intention has not yet been fulfilled."
16-26. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable
Nandaka: "Well then, Nandaka, tomorrow too you should
advise those bhikkhunls in exactly the same way."
"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Nandaka replied. Then, the
next morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed...(repeat verbatim
_§§4—14 above, as far as) [277]...Then the bhikkhunls paid homage_
to the Blessed One and departed keeping him on their right.
27. Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the fif-
teenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the
moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly full, so
too, those bhikkhunls are satisfied with Nandaka's teaching of
the Dhamma and their intention has been fulfilled. Bhikkhus,

even the least advanced of those five hundred bhikkhunls is a
stream-enterer, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliv-
erance], headed for enlightenment."[1322 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
