###### 152 Indriyabhavana Sutta

 The Development of the Faculties

[298] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Kajangala in a grove of mukhelu trees.
2. Then the brahmin student Uttara, a pupil of the brahmin
Parasariya, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings
with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished,
he sat down at one side. The Blessed One then asked him:
"Uttara, does the brahmin Parasariya teach his disciples the
development of the faculties?"
"He does, Master Gotama."
"But, Uttara, how does he teach his disciples the development
of the faculties?"
"Here, Master Gotama, one does not see forms with the eye,
one does not hear sounds with the ear. That is how the brahmin
Parasariya teaches his disciples the development of the faculties."
"If that is so, Uttara, then a blind man and a deaf man will
have developed faculties, according to what the brahmin
Parasariya says. For a blind man does not see forms with the
eye, and a deaf man does not hear sounds with the ear."
When this was said, the brahmin student Uttara, Parasariya's
pupil, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head
down, glum, and without response.
3. Then, knowing this, the Blessed One addressed the venera-
ble Ananda: "Ananda, the brahmin Parasariya teaches his disci-
ples the development of the faculties in one way, but in the
Noble One's Discipline the supreme development of the faculties
is otherwise."[1352 ]

"Now is the time, Blessed One, now is the time, Sublime One,
for the Blessed One [299] to teach the supreme development of
the faculties in the Noble One's Discipline. Having heard it from
the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it."

1148 Indriyabhavana Sutta: Sutta 152 iii 300

"Then listen, Ananda, and attend closely to what I shall say."
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied. The Blessed One said this:
4. "Now, Ananda, how is there the supreme development of
the faculties in the Noble One's Discipline? Here, Ananda, when
a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, there arises in him what is
agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is
both agreeable and disagreeable. [1353] He understands thus:
"There has arisen in me what is agreeable, there has arisen what
is disagreeable, there has arisen what is both agreeable and dis-
agreeable. But that is conditioned, gross, dependently arisen;
this is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, equanimity.' The agree-
able that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agree-
able and disagreeable that arose cease in him and equanimity is
established.[1354] Just as a man with good sight, having opened his
eyes might shut them or having shut his eyes might open them,
so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the
disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and
equanimity is established. This is called in the Noble One's
Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding
forms cognizable by the eye. [1355 ]

5. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu hears a sound with the
ear, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is
disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:...and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might easily snap his fingers, so too concerning
anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that
arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease
just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is
established. This is called in the Noble One's Discipline the
supreme development of the faculties regarding sounds cogniz-
able by the ear.
6. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu smells an odour with the
nose, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is
disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:...and equanimity is established. Just
as [300] raindrops on a slightly sloping lotus leaf roll off and do
not remain there, so too concerning anything at all, the agree-
able that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agree-
able and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as

rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established. This is
called in the Noble One's Discipline the supreme development
of the faculties regarding odours cognizable by the nose.
7. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu tastes a flavour with the
tongue, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what
is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:...and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might easily spit out a ball of spittle collected on
the tip of his tongue, so too concerning anything at all, the
agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both
agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just
as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established. This is
called in the Noble One's Discipline the supreme development
of the faculties regarding flavours cognizable by the tongue.
8. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu touches a tangible with
the body, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what
is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:...and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended
arm, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose,
the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and dis-
agreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as
easily, and equanimity is established. This is called in the Noble
One's Discipline the supreme development of the faculties
regarding tangibles cognizable by the body.
9. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu cognizes a mind-object
with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises
what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and dis-
agreeable. He understands thus:...and equanimity is estab-
lished. Just as if a man were to let two or three drops of water
fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day, the falling of the
drops might be slow but they would quickly vaporise and van-
ish, [1 3 5 6] so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that
arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just
as easily, and equanimity is established. This is called in the
Noble One's Discipline the supreme development of the facul-
ties regarding ideas cognizable by the mind.
"That is how there is the supreme development of the facul-
ties in the Noble One's Discipline.

10. "And how, Ananda, is one a disciple in higher training,
one who has entered upon the way? Here, Ananda, when a
bhikkhu sees a form with the eye. ..[301] hears a sound with the
ear...smells an odour with the nose...tastes a flavour with the
tongue...touches a tangible with the body...cognizes a mind-
object with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there
arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable
and disagreeable; he is ashamed, humiliated and disgusted by
the agreeable that arose, by the disagreeable that arose, and by
the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose.[1357] That is how
one is a disciple in higher training, one who has entered upon
the way.
11-16. "And how, Ananda, is one a noble one with developed
faculties?[1358] Here, Ananda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with
the eye...hears a sound with the ear...smells an odour with the
nose...tastes a flavour with the tongue...touches a tangible with
the body.. .cognizes a mind-object with the mind, there arises in
him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there
arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable.[1359] If he should
wish: 'May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive,'
he abides perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive. If he
should wish: 'May I abide perceiving the repulsive in the unre-
pulsive,' he abides perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive.
If he should wish: 'May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in
the repulsive and the unrepulsive,' he abides perceiving the
unrepulsive in that. If he should wish: 'May I abide perceiving
the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive,' he abides
perceiving the repulsive in that. If he should wish: 'May I,
avoiding both the repulsive and unrepulsive, [302] abide in
equanimity, mindful and fully aware,' he abides in equanimity
towards that, mindful and fully aware. [1360] That is how one is a
noble one with developed faculties.

17. "So, Ananda, the supreme development of the faculties in
the Noble One's Discipline has been taught by me, the disciple
in higher training who has entered upon the way has been
taught by me, and the noble one with developed faculties has
been taught by me.
18. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a Teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, that I have done for you, Ananda. There are these roots of

trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Ananda, do not delay, or else
you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you/'

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

