###### 54 Potaliya Sutta

 To Potaliya

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the country of the Anguttarapans at a town of theirs
named Apana.
2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Apana for alms. When
he had wandered for alms in Apana and had returned from his
almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the day's
abiding. Having entered the grove, he sat down at the root of a
tree.
3. Potaliya the householder, while walking and wandering for
exercise, wearing full dress with parasol and sandals, also went
to the grove, and having entered the grove, he went to the
Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When this cour-
teous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side. The
Blessed One said to him: "There are seats, householder, sit down
if you like."
When this was said, the householder Potaliya thought: "The
recluse Gotama addresses me as 'householder,'" and angry and
displeased, he remained silent.
A second time the Blessed One said to him: "There are seats,
householder, sit down if you like." And a second time the house-
holder Potaliya thought: "The recluse Gotama addresses me as
'householder,'" and angry and displeased, he remained silent.
A third time the Blessed One said to him: "There are seats,
householder, sit down if you like." When this was said, the
householder Potaliya thought: "The recluse Gotama addresses
me as 'householder,'" and angry and displeased, he said to the
Blessed One: [360] "Master Gotama, it is neither fitting nor prop-
er that you address me as 'householder.'"
"Householder, you have the aspects, marks, and signs of a
householder."

"Nevertheless, Master Gotama, I have given up all my works
and cut off all my affairs."
"In what way have you given up all your works, householder,
and cut off all your affairs?"
"Master Gotama, I have given all my wealth, grain, silver, and
gold to my children as their inheritance. Without advising or
admonishing them, I live merely on food and clothing. That is
how I have given up all my works and cut off all my affairs."
"Householder, the cutting off of affairs as you describe it is
one thing, but in the Noble One's Discipline the cutting off of
affairs is different."
"What is the cutting off of affairs like in the Noble One's
Discipline, venerable sir? It would be good, venerable sir, if the
Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma, showing what the
cutting off of affairs is like in the Noble One's Discipline."
"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall say."
"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this:
4. "Householder, there are these eight things in the Noble
One's Discipline that lead to the cutting off of affairs. What are
the eight? With the support of the non-killing of living beings,
the killing of living beings is to be abandoned. With the support
of taking only what is given, the taking of what is not given is to
be abandoned. With the support of truthful speech, false speech
is to be abandoned. With the support of unmalicious speech,
malicious speech is to be abandoned. With the support of
refraining from rapacious greed, [567] rapacious greed is to be
abandoned. With the support of refraining from spiteful scold-
ing, spiteful scolding is to be abandoned. With the support of
refraining from angry despair, angry despair is to be aban-
doned. With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be
abandoned. These are the eight things, stated in brief without
being expounded in detail, that lead to the cutting off of affairs
in the Noble One's Discipline."
5. "Venerable sir, it would be good if, out of compassion, the
Blessed One would expound to me in detail these eight things
that lead to the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One's
Discipline, which have been stated in brief by the Blessed One
without being expounded in detail."
"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this: [361]
6. "'With the support of the non-killing of living beings, the
killing of living beings is to be abandoned.' So it was said. And
with reference to what was this said? Here a noble disciple con-
siders thus: 'I am practising the way to the abandoning and cut-
ting off of those fetters because of which I might kill living
beings. If I were to kill living beings, I would blame myself for
doing so; the wise, having investigated, would censure me for
doing so; and on the dissolution of the body, after death,
because of killing living beings an unhappy destination would
be expected. But this killing of living beings is itself a fetter and
a hindrance.[568] And while taints, vexation, and fever might
arise through the killing of living beings, there are no taints,
vexation, and fever in one who abstains from killing living
beings.' So it is with reference to this that it was said: 'With the
support of the non-killing of living beings, the killing of living
beings is to be abandoned.'
7. '"With the support of taking only what is given, the taking
of what is not given is to be abandoned.' So it was said...
8. '"With the support of truthful speech, false speech is to be
abandoned.' So it was said... [362]
9. '"With the support of unmalicious speech, malicious speech
is to be abandoned.' So it was said...
10. '"With the support of refraining from rapacious greed,
rapacious greed is to be abandoned.' So it was said...
11. '"With the support of refraining from spiteful scolding,
spiteful scolding is to be abandoned.' So it was said.. .[363]
12. '"With the support of refraining from angry despair, angry
despair is to be abandoned.' So it was said...
13. '"With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be
abandoned.' So it was said. And with reference to what was this
said? Here a noble disciple considers thus: 'I am practising the
way to the abandoning and cutting off of those fetters because of
which I might be arrogant. If I were to be arrogant, I would
blame myself for this; the wise, having investigated, would cen-
sure me for this; and on the dissolution of the body, after death,
because of being arrogant an unhappy destination would be
expected. But this arrogance is itself a fetter and a hindrance-
And while taints, vexation, and fever might arise through arro-

gance, there are no taints, vexation, and fever for one who is not
arrogant.' So it is with reference to this that it was said: 'With the
support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be abandoned.'[569] [364]
14. "These eight things that lead to the cutting off of affairs in
the Noble One's Discipline have now been expounded in detail.
But the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One's Discipline has
not yet been achieved entirely and in all ways."
"Venerable sir, how is the cutting off of affairs in the Noble
One's Discipline achieved entirely and in all ways? It would be
good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would teach me the
Dhamma, showing me how the cutting off of affairs in the
Noble One's Discipline is achieved entirely and in all ways."
"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall
say."
"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this:
15. "Householder, suppose a dog, overcome by hunger and
weakness, was waiting by a butcher's shop. [570] Then a skilled
butcher or his apprentice would cut out a skeleton of meatless
bones smeared with blood and toss it to the dog. What do you
think, householder? Would that dog get rid of his hunger and
weakness by gnawing such a skeleton of meatless bones
smeared with blood?"
"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that skeleton consist-
ed only of meatless bones smeared with blood. Eventually that
dog would reap weariness and disappointment."
"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a skeleton by the Blessed One;
they provide much suffering and much despair, while the dan-
ger in them is great.' Haying seen this thus as it actually is with
proper wisdom, he avoids the equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity, and develops the equanimity that is unified,
based on unity,[571] where clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.
16. "Householder, suppose a vulture, a crow, or a hawk seized
a piece of meat and flew away, and then vultures, crows, and
hawks flew up and pecked and clawed it. What do you think,
householder? If that vulture, crow, or hawk does not quickly let
go of that piece of meat, wouldn't it incur death or deadly suf-
fering because of that?"

"Yes, venerable sir."
"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a piece of meat by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' [365] Having seen this thus as it actually
is with proper wisdom...clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.
17. "Householder, suppose a man took a blazing grass torch
and went against the wind. What do you think, householder? If
that man does not quickly let go of that blazing grass torch,
wouldn't that blazing grass torch burn his hand or his arm or
some other part of his body, so that he might incur death or
deadly suffering because of that?"
"Yes, venerable sir."
"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a grass torch by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is
with proper wisdom...clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.
18. "Householder, suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper
than a man's height full of glowing coals without flame or
smoke. Then a man came who wanted to live and not to die,
who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain, and two strong
men seized him by both arms and dragged him towards that
charcoal pit. What do you think, householder? Would that man
twist his body this way and that?"
"Yes, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that man knows that
if he falls into that charcoal pit, he will incur death or deadly
suffering because of that."
"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a charcoal pit by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is
with proper wisdom...clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.
19. "Householder, suppose a man dreamt about lovely parks,
lovely groves, lovely meadows, and lovely lakes, and on waking
he saw nothing of it. So too, householder, a noble disciple con-
siders thus: 'Sensual pleasures have been compared to a dream

by the Blessed One; they provide much suffering and much
despair, while the danger in them is great.' Having seen this
thus as it actually is with proper wisdom...clinging to the mate-
rial things of the world utterly ceases without remainder.
20. "Householder, suppose a man borrowed goods on loan

[366] - a fancy carriage and fine-jewelled earrings - and preceded
and surrounded by those borrowed goods he went to the mar-
ketplace. Then people, seeing him, would say: 'Sirs, that is a rich
man! That is how the rich enjoy their wealth!' Then the owners,
whenever they saw him, would take back their things. What do
you think, householder? Would that be enough for that man to
become dejected?"
"Yes, venerable sir. Why is that? Because the owners took
back their things."
"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to borrowed goods by the
Blessed One; they provide much suffering and much despair,
while the danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it
actually is with proper wisdom...clinging to material things of
the world utterly ceases without remainder.
21. "Householder, suppose there were a dense grove not far
from some village or town, within which there was a tree laden
with fruit but none of its fruit had fallen to the ground. Then a
man came needing fruit, seeking fruit, wandering in search of
fruit, and he entered the grove and saw the tree laden with fruit.
Thereupon he thought: 'This tree is laden with fruit but none of
its fruit has fallen to the ground. I know how to climb a tree, so
let me climb this tree, eat as much fruit as I want, and fill my
bag.' And he did so. Then a second man came needing fruit,
seeking fruit, wandering in search of fruit, and taking a sharp
axe, he too entered the grove and saw that tree laden with fruit.
Thereupon he thought: 'This tree is laden with fruit but none of
its fruit has fallen to the ground. I do not know how to climb a
tree, so let me cut this tree down at its root, eat as much fruit as I
want, and fill my bag.' And he did so. What do you think,
householder? If that first man who had climbed the tree doesn't
come down quickly, when the tree falls, wouldn't he break his
hand or his foot or some other part of his body, [367] so that he
might incur death or deadly suffering because of that?"
"Yes, venerable sir."

"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a fruit tree by the Blessed One;
they provide much suffering and much despair, while the dan-
ger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is with
proper wisdom, he avoids the equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity, and develops the equanimity that is unified,
based on unity, where clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.
22. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, this noble disciple recollects his
manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births...(as Sutta 51,
_ยง24)...Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his_
manifold past lives.
23. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, with the divine eye, which is puri-
fied and surpasses the human, this noble disciple sees beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate...(as Sutta 51, ยง25)...and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions.
24. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, by realising for himself with direct
knowledge, this noble disciple here and now enters upon and
abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
25. "At this point, householder, the cutting off of affairs in the
Noble One's Discipline has been achieved entirely and in all
ways. What do you think, householder? Do you see in yourself
any cutting off of affairs like this cutting off of affairs in the Noble
One's Discipline when it is achieved entirely and in all ways?"
"Venerable sir, who am I that I should possess any cutting off
of affairs entirely and in all ways like that in the Noble One's
Discipline? I am far indeed, venerable sir, from that cutting off
of affairs in the Noble One's Discipline when it has been
achieved entirely and in all ways. For, venerable sir, though the
wanderers of other sects are not thoroughbreds, we imagined
that they are thoroughbreds;[572] though they are not thorough-
breds, we fed them the food of thoroughbreds; though they are
not thoroughbreds, we set them in the place of thoroughbreds.
But though the bhikkhus are thoroughbreds, we imagined that
they are not thoroughbreds; though they are thoroughbreds, we

i 36 _To Potaliya_ 473

fed them the food of those who are not thoroughbreds; though
they are thoroughbreds, we set them in the place of those who
are not thoroughbreds. But now, venerable sir, [368] as the wan-
derers of other sects are not thoroughbreds, we shall understand
that they are not thoroughbreds; as they are not thoroughbreds,
we shall feed them the food of those who are not thorough-
breds; as they are not thoroughbreds, we shall set them in the
place of those who are not thoroughbreds. But as the bhikkhus
are thoroughbreds, we shall understand that they are thorough-
breds; as they are thoroughbreds, we shall feed them the food of
thoroughbreds; as they are thoroughbreds, we shall set them in
the place of those who are thoroughbreds. Venerable sir, the
Blessed One has inspired in me love for recluses, confidence in
recluses, reverence for recluses.
26. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."
