###### 59 Bahuvedaniya Sutta

 The Many Kinds of Feeling

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
2. Then the carpenter Pancakanga[615] went to the venerable
Udayin, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one
side and asked him:
3. "Venerable sir, how many kinds of feeling have been stated
by the Blessed One?"
"Three kinds of feeling have been stated by the Blessed One,
householder: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling. [397] These three kinds of feeling
have been stated by the Blessed One."
"Not three kinds of feeling have been stated by the Blessed
One, venerable Udayin; two kinds of feeling have been stated
by the Blessed One: pleasant feeling and painful feeling. This
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling has been stated by the
Blessed One as a peaceful and sublime kind of pleasure."
A second time and a third time the venerable Udayin stated
his position, and a second time and a third time the carpenter
Pancakanga stated his. But the venerable Udayin could not con-
vince the carpenter Pancakanga nor could the c a r p e n t e r
Pancakanga convince the venerable Udayin.
4. The venerable Ananda heard their conversation. Then he
went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat
down at one side and reported to the Blessed One the entire
conversation between the venerable Udayin and the carpenter
Pancakanga. When he had finished, the Blessed One told the
venerable Ananda:
5. "Ananda, it was actually a true presentation that the car-
penter Pancakanga would not accept from Udayin, and it was
actually a true presentation that Udayin would not accept f r o m

i 399 _The Many Kinds of Feeling_ 503

the carpenter Pancakanga. I have stated two kinds of feeling in
one presentation; [398] I have stated three kinds of feeling in
another presentation; I have stated five kinds of feeling in
another presentation; I have stated six kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated eighteen kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated thirty-six kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated one hundred and eight kinds of feel-
ing in another presentation.[616] That is how the Dhamma has
been shown by me in [different] presentations.
"When the Dhamma has thus been shown by me in [different]
presentations, it may be expected of those who will not concede,
allow, and accept what is well stated and well spoken by others
that they will take to quarreling, brawling, and disputing, stab-
bing each other with verbal daggers. But it may be expected of
those who concede, allow, and accept what is well stated and
well spoken by others that they will live in concord, with mutu-
al appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and
water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.
6. "Ananda, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure.
What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual
desire and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the ear...
Odours cognizable by the nose...Flavours cognizable by the
tongue...Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensual plea-
sure. Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these
five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure.
7. "Should anyone say: 'That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience,' I would not concede that to him. Why is
that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure.
8. "Should anyone say: 'That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience,' I would not concede that to him. [399]

Why is that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier
and more sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other
kind of pleasure? Here, Ananda, with the stilling of applied and
sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the sec-
ond jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind
without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and plea-
sure born of concentration. This is that other kind of pleasure
loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
9. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, with the fading away as well of rapture, a
bhikkhu abides in equanimity, mindful and fully aware, and
still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in
the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He
has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This
is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the
previous pleasure.
10. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain,
and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure.[617 ]

11. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, with the complete surmounting of
perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of
sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters upon and abides
in the base of infinite space. This is that other kind of pleasure
loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
12. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base
of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite con-
sciousness. This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than the previous pleasure.
13. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base
of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.

This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure. [400]
14. "Should anyone say...And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base of
nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. This is that other kind of
pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.
15. "Should anyone say: "That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience/ I would not concede that to him. Why is
that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon
and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is that
other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previ-
ous pleasure.
16. "It is possible, Ananda, that wanderers of other sects might
speak thus: 'The recluse Gotama speaks of the cessation of per-
ception and feeling and he describes that as pleasure. What is
this, and how is this?' Wanderers of other sects who speak thus
should be told: 'Friends, the Blessed One describes pleasure not
only with reference to pleasant feeling; rather, friends, the
Tathagata describes as pleasure any kind of pleasure wherever
and in whatever way it is found.'"[618 ]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
