###### 61 Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta

 Advice to Rahula at Ambalatthika

[414] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.
2. Now on that occasion the venerable Rahula was living at
Ambalatthika.[637] Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One
rose from meditation and went to the venerable Rahula at
Ambalatthika. The venerable Rahula saw the Blessed One com-
ing in the distance and made a seat ready and set out water for
washing the feet. The Blessed One sat down on the seat made
ready and washed his feet. The venerable Rahula paid homage
to him and sat down at one side.
3. Then the Blessed One left a little water in the water vessel
and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this little
water left in the water vessel?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so
little, Rahula, is the recluseship of those who are not ashamed to
tell a deliberate lie."
4. Then the Blessed One threw away the little water that was
left and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see that
little water that was thrown away?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Even so, Rahula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate
lie have thrown away their recluseship."
5. Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel upside down
and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this water
vessel turned upside down?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so,
Rahula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie have
turned their recluseship upside down."
6. Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel right way up
again and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this
hollow, empty water vessel?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so

hollow and empty, Rahula, is the recluseship of those who are
not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie."
7. "Suppose, Rahula, there were a royal tusker elephant with
tusks as long as chariot poles, full-grown in stature, high-bred,
and accustomed to battle. In battle he would perform his task
with his forefeet and his hindfeet, with his forequarters and his
hindquarters, with his head and his ears, with his tusks and his
tail, [415] yet he would keep back his trunk. Then his rider would
think: 'This royal tusker elephant with tusks as long as chariot
poles.. .performs his task in battle with his forefeet and his hind-
feet... yet he keeps back his trunk. He has not yet given up his
life.' But when the royal tusker elephant...performs his task in
battle with his forefeet and his hindfeet, with his forequarters
and his hindquarters, with his head and his ears, with his tusks
and his tail, and also with his trunk, then his rider would think:
'This royal tusker elephant with tusks as long as chariot
poles...performs his task in battle with his forefeet and his hind-
feet...and also with his trunk. He has given up his life. Now
there is nothing this royal tusker elephant would not do.' So too,
Rahula, when one is not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie, there is
no evil, I say, that one would not do. Therefore, Rahula, you
should train thus: 'I will not utter a falsehood even as a joke.'

8. "What do you think, Rahula? What is the purpose of a mirror?"
"For the purpose of reflection, venerable sir."
"So too, Rahula, an action with the body should be done after
repeated reflection; an action by speech should be done after
repeated reflection; an action by mind should be done after
repeated reflection.
9. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action with the body,
you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus: 'Would
this action that I wish to do with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I wish to do with the body would lead to my
own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction
of both; it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results,' then you definitely should not
do such an action with the body. [416] But when you reflect, if
you know: 'This action that I wish to do with the body would

not lead to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to
the affliction of both; it is a wholesome bodily action with
pleasant consequences, with pleasant results/ then you may do
such an action with the body.
10. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action with the
body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus:
'Does this action that I am doing with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I am doing with the body leads to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both;
it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences,
with painful results,' then you should suspend such a bodily
action. But when you reflect, if you know: 'This action that I am
doing with the body does not lead to my own affliction, or to the
affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it is a wholesome
bodily action with pleasant consequences, with pleasant results,'
then you may continue in such a bodily action.
11. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action with the
body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus:
'Does this action that I have done with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Was it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I have done with the body leads to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both;
it was an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results,' then you should confess such a
bodily action, reveal it, and lay it open to the Teacher or to your
wise companions in the holy life. Having confessed it, revealed
it, and laid it open, [417] you should undertake restraint for the
future.[638] But when you reflect, if you know: 'This action that I
have done with the body does not lead to my own affliction, or
to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it was a
wholesome bodily action with pleasant consequences, pleasant
results,' you can abide happy and glad, training day and night
in wholesome states.
12. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action by speech...(com-
_plete as in §9, substituting "speech "for "body")...you may do_

526 _Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta: Sutta 61_ i 4

such an action by speech.
13. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action by speech...
_(complete as in §10, substituting "speech" for "body") [418]...you_
may continue in such an action by speech.
14. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action by speech...
_(icomplete_ _as in §11, substituting "speech"for "body")...you can_
abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome
states.
15. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action by mind...(com-
_plete as in §9, substituting "mind" for "body") [419]...you may do_
such an action by mind.
16. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action by mind...
_(complete as in §10, substituting "mind "for "body")...you may_
continue in such a mental action.
17. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action by mind...
_(complete as in §11, substituting "mind "for "body"[639])...you can_
abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome
states. [420]
18. "Rahula, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past puri-
fied their bodily action, their verbal action, and their mental
action, all did so by repeatedly reflecting thus. Whatever recluses
and brahmins in the future will purify their bodily action, their
verbal action, and their mental action, all will do so by repeatedly
reflecting thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present
are purifying their bodily action, their verbal action, and their
mental action, all are doing so by repeatedly reflecting thus.
Therefore, Rahula, you should train thus: 'We will purify our
bodily action, our verbal action, and our mental action by
repeatedly reflecting upon them.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
