###### 70 Kitagiri Sutta

 At Kitagiri

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kasi country together with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
2. "Bhikkhus, I abstain from eating at night. By so doing, I am
free from illness and affliction, and I enjoy health, strength, and
a comfortable abiding. Come, bhikkhus, abstain from eating at
night. By so doing, you too will be free from illness and afflic-
tion, and you will enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable
abiding."[696 ]

"Yes, venerable sir," they replied.
3. Then, as the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the
Kasi country, he eventually arrived at a Kasi town called Kita-
giri. There he lived in this Kasi town, Kitagiri.
4. Now on that occasion the bhikkhus named Assaji and
Punabbasuka were residing at Kitagiri.[697] Then a number of
bhikkhus went and told them: "Friends, the Blessed One and the
Sangha of bhikkhus now abstain from eating at night. By so
doing, they are free from illness and affliction, and they enjoy
health, strength, and a comfortable abiding. Come, friends,
abstain from eating at night. By so doing, you too will be free,
from illness and affliction, and you will enjoy health, strength,
and a comfortable abiding." [474] When this was said, the
bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka told those bhikkhus:
"Friends, we eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day
outside the proper time. By so doing, we are free from illness
and affliction, and we enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable
abiding. Why should we abandon [a benefit] visible here and
now to pursue [a benefit to be achieved] at a future time? We
shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside
the proper time."

5. Since the bhikkhus were unable to convince the bhikkhus
Assaji and Punabbasuka, they went to the Blessed One. After
paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him
all that had occurred, adding: "Venerable sir, since we were
unable to convince the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka, we
have reported this matter to the Blessed One."
6. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka in
my name that the Teacher calls them."
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the bhikkhus
Assaji and Punabbasuka and told them: "The Teacher calls
you, friends."
"Yes, friend," they replied, and they went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The
Blessed One then said: "Bhikkhus, is it true that when a number
of bhikkhus went and told you: 'Friends, the Blessed One and the
Sangha now abstain from eating at night.. .Come, friends, abstain
from eating at night [475]...,' you told those bhikkhus: 'Friends,
we eat in the evening.. .Why should we abandon [a benefit] visi-
ble here and now to pursue [a benefit to be achieved] at a future
time? We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day
outside the proper time'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."
"Bhikkhus, have you known me to teach the Dhamma in such
a way as this: 'Whatever this person experiences, whether pleas-
ant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, unwholesome
states diminish in him and wholesome states increase'?"[698] -
"No, venerable sir."
7. "Bhikkhus, have you not known me to teach the Dhamma
in such a way as this: 'Here, when someone feels a certain kind
of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and
wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another
kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him
and wholesome states increase.[699] Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in
him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels
another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in
him and wholesome states increase. Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but
when someone feels another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant

feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome
states increase'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."
8. "Good, bhikkhus.[700] And if it were unknown by me, unseen,
unfound, unrealised, uncontacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when
someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome
states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,' would it
be fitting for me, not knowing that, to say: 'Abandon such a
kind of pleasant feeling'?" - "No, venerable sir."
"But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted
by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a certain kind of
pleasant feeling [476], unwholesome states increase in him and
wholesome states diminish,' that I therefore say: 'Abandon such
a kind of pleasant feeling.'
"If it were unknown by me, unseen, unfound, unrealised,
uncontacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels another
kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him
and wholesome states increase,' would it be fitting for me, not
knowing that, to say: 'Enter upon and abide in such a kind of
pleasant feeling'?" - "No, venerable sir."
"But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted
by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels another kind of
pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and
wholesome states increase,' that I therefore say: 'Enter upon and
abide in such a kind of pleasant feeling.'
9. "If it were unknown by me...But because it is known by
me...contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in
him and wholesome states diminish,' that I therefore say:
'Abandon such a kind of painful feeling.'
"If it were unknown by me...But because it is known by
me...contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels
another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in
him and wholesome states increase,' that I therefore say: 'Enter
upon and abide in such a kind of painful feeling.'
10. "If it were unknown by me...But because it is known by
me...contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,'
that I therefore say: 'Abandon such a kind of neither-painful-
nor-pleasant feeling.'

"If it were unknown by me...But because it is known by
me...contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels
another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,'
that I therefore say: [477] 'Enter upon and abide in such a kind
of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.'
11. "Bhikkhus, I do not say of all bhikkhus that they still have
work to do with diligence; nor do I say of all bhikkhus that they
have no more work to do with diligence.
12. "I do not say of those bhikkhus who are arahants with
taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to
be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final
knowledge, that they still have work to do with diligence. Why
is that? They have done their work with diligence; they are no
more capable of being negligent.
13. "I say of such bhikkhus who are in higher training, whose
minds have not yet reached the goal, and who are still aspiring
to the supreme security from bondage, that they still have work
to do with diligence. Why is that? Because when those venerable
ones make use of suitable resting places and associate with good
friends and balance their spiritual faculties, they may by realis-
ing for themselves with direct knowledge here and now enter
upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake
of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into
homelessness. Seeing this fruit of diligence for these bhikkhus, I
say that they still have work to do with diligence.
14. "Bhikkhus, there are seven kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world.[701] What seven? They are: one liberated-in-
both ways, one liberated-by-wisdom, a body-witness, one
attained-to-view, one liberated-by-faith, a Dhamma-follower,
and a faith-follower.
15. "What kind of person is one liberated-in-both-ways? Here
some person contacts with the body and abides in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This kind of
person is called one liberated-in-both-ways.[702] I do not say of
such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why
is that? He has done his work with diligence; he is no more
capable of being negligent.

16. "What kind of person is one liberated-by-wisdom? Here
some person does not contact with the body and abide in those
liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending
forms, but his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-wisdom.[703] [478] I
do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with
diligence. Why is that? He has done his work with diligence; he
is no more capable of being negligent.
17. "What kind of person is a body-witness? Here some per-
son contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that
are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and some of
his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This kind
of person is called a body-witness.[704] I say of such a bhikkhu
that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
Because when that venerable one makes use of suitable resting
places and associates with good friends and balances his spiritu-
al faculties, he may by realising for himself with direct knowl-
edge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal
of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth
from the home life into homelessness. Seeing this fruit of dili-
gence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do
with diligence.
18. "What kind of person is one attained-to-view? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but
some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and
he has reviewed and examined with wisdom the teachings pro-
claimed by the Tathagata. This kind of person is called one
attained-to-view.[705] 1 say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work
to do with diligence. Why is that? Because when that venerable
one...into homelessness. Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a
bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.
19. "What kind of person is one liberated-by-faith? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but
some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and
his faith is planted, rooted, and established in the Tathagata.[706 ]
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-faith. I say of such
a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is
that? Because when that venerable one [479]...into homelessness.

Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he
still has work to do with diligence.
20. "What kind of person is a Dhamma-follower? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, but
with wisdom he has sufficiently gained a reflective acceptance
of those teachings proclaimed by the Tathagata. Furthermore, he
has these qualities: the faith faculty, the energy faculty, the
mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom
faculty. This kind of person is called a Dhamma-follower.[707] 1 say
of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why
is that? Because when that venerable one...into homelessness.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still
has work to do with diligence.
21. "What kind of person is a faith-follower? Here some per-
son does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, yet
he has sufficient faith in and love for the Tathagata. Further-
more, he has these qualities: the faith faculty, the energy faculty,
the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wis-
dom faculty. This kind of person is called a faith-follower. I say
of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
Why is that? Because when that venerable one makes use of
suitable resting places and associates with good friends and bal-
ances his spiritual faculties, he may by realising for himself with
direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. Seeing
this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has
work to do with diligence.

22. "Bhikkhus, I do not say that final knowledge is achieved
all at once. On the contrary, final knowledge is achieved by
gradual training, by gradual practice, by gradual progress. [480]
23. "And how does there come to be gradual training, gradual
practice, gradual progress? Here one who has faith [in a teacher]
visits him; when he visits him, he pays respect to him; when he
pays respect to him, he gives ear; one who gives ear hears the
Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it; he

examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when
he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of
those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of
those teachings, zeal springs up in him; when zeal has sprung
up, he applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises;
having scrutinised, he strives; resolutely striving, he realises
with the body the ultimate truth and sees it by penetrating it
with wisdom.[708 ]

24. "There has not been that faith,[709] bhikkhus, and there has
not been that visiting, and there has not been that paying of
respect, and there has not been that giving ear, and there has not
been that hearing of the Dhamma, and there has not been that
memorising of the Dhamma, and there has not been that exami-
nation of the meaning, and there has not been that reflective
acceptance of the teachings, and there has not been that zeal, and
there has not been that application of will, and there has not been
that scrutiny, and there has not been that striving. Bhikkhus, you
have lost your way; bhikkhus, you have been practising the
wrong way. How far you have strayed, misguided men, from
this Dhamma and Discipline!
25. "Bhikkhus, there is a four-phrased statement, and when it
is recited a wise man would quickly understand it. [710] I shall
recite it to you, bhikkhus. Try to understand it."
"Venerable sir, who are we that we should understand the
Dhamma?"
26. "Bhikkhus, even with a teacher who is concerned with
material things, an heir to material things, attached to material
things, such haggling [by his disciples] would not be proper: 'If
we get this, we will do it; if we don't get this, we won't do it'; so
what [should be said when the teacher is] the Tathagata, who is
utterly detached from material things?
27. "Bhikkhus, for a faithful disciple who is intent on fathom-
ing the Teacher's Dispensation, it is proper that he conduct him-
self thus: 'The Blessed One is the Teacher, I am a disciple; the
Blessed One knows, I do not know.' For a faithful disciple who
is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, the Teacher's
Dispensation is nourishing and refreshing. For a faithful disciple
who is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, [481] it
is proper that he conduct himself thus: 'Willingly, let only my
skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry

up on my body, but my energy shall not be relaxed so long as I
have not attained what can be attained by manly strength,
manly energy, and manly persistence.'[711] For a faithful disciple
who is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, one of
two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge here and
now or, if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
