###### 81 Ghatikara Sutta

 Ghatikara the Potter

[45] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering among the Kosalans together with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus.
2. Then in a certain place beside the main road the Blessed
One smiled. It Occurred to the venerable Ananda: "What is the
reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One's smile? Tatha-
gatas do not smile for no reason." So he arranged his upper robe
on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential saluta-
tion towards the Blessed One, asked him: "Venerable sir, what is
the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One's smile?
Tathagatas do not smile for no reason."
3. "Once, Ananda, in this place there was a prosperous and
busy market town called Vebhalinga, with many inhabitants
and crowded with people. Now the Blessed One Kassapa,
accomplished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town
Vebhalinga. It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa,
accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was
here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, resided and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus."
4. Then the venerable Ananda folded his patchwork cloak in
four, and spreading it out, said to the Blessed One: "Then, vener-
able sir, let the Blessed One be seated. Thus this place will have
been used by two Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones."
The Blessed One sat down on the seat that had been made
ready and addressed the venerable Ananda thus:
5. "Once, Ananda, in this place there was a prosperous and busy
market town called Vebhalinga, with many inhabitants and
crowded with people. Now the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town
Vebhalinga. It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa,

accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was
here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, resided [46] and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus.
6. "In Vebhalinga the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, had as a supporter, as his chief supporter, a
potter named Ghatikara. Ghatikara the potter had as a friend, as
his close friend, a brahmin student named Jotipala.[790 ]

"One day the potter Ghatikara addressed the brahmin student
Jotipala thus: 'My dear Jotipala, let us go and see the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it
is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' The brahmin student Jotipala replied: 'Enough, my dear
Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?'
"A second and third time the potter Ghatikara said: 'My dear
Jotipala, let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is good to see that
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.' And a sec-
ond and a third time the brahmin student Jotipala replied:
'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that bald-
pated recluse?' - 'Then, my dear Jotipala, let us take a loofah
and bath powder and go to the river to bathe.' - 'Very well,'
Jotipala replied.
7. "So the potter Ghatikara and the brahmin student Jotipala
took a loofah and bath powder and went to the river to bathe.
Then Ghatikara said to Jotipala: 'My dear Jotipala, there is the
monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, quite nearby. Let us go and see the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is
good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' Jotipala replied: 'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is [47]
the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?'
"A second and a third time Ghatikara said: 'My dear Jotipala,
there is the monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa...' And a sec-
ond and a third time the brahmin student Jotipala replied:
'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that bald-
pated recluse?'[791 ]

8. "Then the potter Ghatikara seized the brahmin student
Jotipala by the belt and said: 'My dear Jotipala, there is the
monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, quite nearby. Let us go and see the Blessed One

Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is
good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' Then the brahmin student Jotipala undid his belt and
said: 'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that
bald-pated recluse?'
9. "Then, when the brahmin student Jotipala had washed his
head, the potter Ghatikara seized him by the hair and said:[792 ]
'My dear Jotipala, there is the monastery of the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, quite nearby. Let
us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One,
accomplished and fully enlightened.'
"Then the brahmin student Jotipala thought: 'It is wonderful,
it is marvellous that this potter Ghatikara, who is of a different
birth, should presume to seize me by the hair when we have
washed our heads! Surely this can be no simple matter.' And he
said to the potter Ghatikara: 'You go as far as this, my dear
Ghatikara?' - 'I go as far as this, my dear Jotipala; for so much

[48] do I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accom-
plished and fully enlightened!' - 'Then, my dear Ghatikara, let
go of me. Let us visit him.'
10. "So Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student
went to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. Ghatikara, after paying homage to him, sat down
at one side, while Jotipala exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat
down at one side. Ghatikara then said to the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened: 'Venerable sir,
this is the brahmin student Jotipala, my friend, my close friend.
Let the Blessed One teach him the Dhamma.'
"Then the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged
Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student with an
exposition of the Dhamma. At the conclusion of the exposition,
having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One Kassapa's
words, they rose from their seats, and after paying homage to
the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened,
keeping him on their right, they departed.
11. "Then Jotipala asked Ghatikara: 'Now that you have
heard this Dhamma, my dear Ghatikara, why don't you go

forth from the home life into homelessness?' - 'My diear Jotipala,
don't you know that I support my blind and aged parents?' -
'Then, my dear Ghatikara, I shall go forth from the home life
into homelessness.'
12. "So Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student
went to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. [49] After paying homage to him, they sat down at
one side and Ghatikara the potter said to the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened: 'Venerable sir,
this is the brahmin student Jotipala, my friend, my close friend.
Let the Blessed One give him the going forth.' And the brahmin
student Jotipala received the going forth from the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, and he received
the full admission.[793 ]

13. "Then not long after Jotipala the brahmin student had
received the full admission, a half-month after he had received
the full admission, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, having stayed at Vebhalinga as long as he
chose, set out to wander towards Benares. Wandering by stages,
he eventually arrived at Benares, and there he went to live in the
Deer Park at Isipatana.
14. "Now King KikI of Kasi heard: 'It seems that the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, has reached
Benares and is living in the Deer Park at Isipatana.' So he had a
number of state carriages made ready, and mounting a state car-
riage, drove out from Bepares with the full pomp of royalty in
order to see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. He went thus as far as the road was passable for
carriages, and then he got down from his carriage and went for-
ward on foot to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened. After paying homage to him, he sat down at
one side and the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged King
KikI of Kasi with an exposition of the Dhamma.
15. "At the conclusion of the exposition, King KikI of Kasi
said: [50] 'Venerable sir, let the Blessed One together with the
Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow's meal from
me.' And the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, accepted in silence. Then, knowing that the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had accepted,

he rose from his seat and after paying homage to him, keeping
him on his right, he departed.
16. "Then, when the night had ended, King Kiki of Kasi had
good food of various kinds prepared in his own dwelling - red
rice stored in the sheaf with the dark grains picked out, along
with many sauces and curries - and he had the time announced
to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, thus: 'It is time, venerable sir, the meal is ready.'
17. "Then, it being morning, the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the dwelling
of King Kiki of Kasi and sat down on the seat made ready. Then,
with his own hands, King Kiki of Kasi served and satisfied the
Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various
kinds of good food. When the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, had eaten and had withdrawn his
hand from the bowl, King Kiki of Kasi took a low seat, sat down
at one side and said: 'Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept
from me a residence for the Rains in Benares; that will be helpful
for the Sangha.' - 'Enough, king, my residence for the Rains has
already been provided for.'
"A second and a third time King Kiki of Kasi said: 'Venerable
sir, let the Blessed One accept from me a residence for the Rains
in Benares; that will be helpful for the Sangha.' - 'Enough, king,
my residence for the Rains has already been provided for.'
"The king thought: 'The Blessed One Kassapa, [51] accom-
plished and fully enlightened, does not accept from me a resi-
dence for the Rains in Benares,' and he was very disappointed
and sad.
18. "Then he said: 'Venerable sir, have you a better supporter
than I am?' - 'I have, great king. There is a market town called
Vebhalinga where a potter named Ghatlkara lives. He is my
supporter, my chief supporter. Now you, great king, thought:
"The Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened,
does not accept from me a residence for the Rains in Benares,"
and you were very disappointed and sad; but the potter Ghap-
kara is not and will not be so. The potter Ghatlkara has gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. He
abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not
given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech,

and from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of
negligence. He has perfect confidence in the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sangha, and he possesses the virtues loved by
noble ones. He is free from doubt about suffering, about the ori-
gin of suffering, about the cessation of suffering, and about the
way leading to the cessation of suffering. He eats only in one
part of the day, he observes celibacy, he is virtuous, of good
character. He has laid aside gems and gold, he has given up
gold and silver. He does not dig the ground for clay using a pick
with his own hand; what is left over from embankments or
thrown up by rats, he brings home in a carrier; when he has
made a pot he says: "Let anyone who likes set down some
selected rice or selected beans or selected lentils, and let him
take away whatever he likes."[794] He supports his blind and aged
parents. [52] Having destroyed the five lower fetters, he is one
who will reappear spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there
attain final Nibbana without ever returning from that world.
19. "'On one occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga, it
being morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I
went to the potter Ghatlkara's parents and asked them: "Where
has the potter gone, please?" - "Venerable sir, your supporter
has gone out; but take rice from the cauldron and sauce from the
saucepan and eat."
'"I did so and went away. Then the potter Ghatikara went to
his parents and asked: "Who has taken rice from the cauldron
and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?" - "My
dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, did."
'"Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And rapture and hap-
piness never left him for a half-month or his parents for a week.
20. '"On another occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga, it
being morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I
went to the potter Ghatlkara's parents and asked them: "Where
has the potter gone, please?" - "Venerable sir, your supporter
has gone out; but take some porridge from the vessel and sauce
from the saucepan and eat."
"'I did so [53] and went away. Then the potter Ghatikara
went to his parents and asked: "Who has taken porridge from

the vessel and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?"

    - "My dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, did."
'"Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And rapture and hap-
piness never left him for a half-month or his parents for a week.
21. '"On another occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga my
hut leaked. Then I addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Go, bhikkhus,
and find out if there is any grass at the potter Ghatlkara's house."

    - "Venerable sir, there is no grass at the potter Ghatlkara's
house; there is the grass thatch on his roof." - "Go, bhikkhus,
and remove the grass from the potter Ghatlkara's house."
'"They did so. Then the potter Ghatlkara's parents asked the
bhikkhus: "Who is removing the grass from the house?" -
"Sister, the hut of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, is leaking." - "Take it, venerable sirs, take it
and bless you!"
'"Then the potter Ghatikara went to his parents and asked:
"Who has removed the grass from the roof?" - "The bhikkhus
did, my dear; the hut of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, is leaking."
'"Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And [54] the rapture
and happiness never left him for a half-month or his parents for
a week. Then that house remained three whole months with the
sky for a roof, and yet no rain came in. Such is the potter
Ghatikara.'
"'It is a gain for the potter Ghatikara, it is a great gain for him
that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, relies on him thus.'
22. "Then King Kikl of Kasi dispatched to the potter Ghatikara
five hundred cartloads of red rice stored in the sheaf, and also
sauce materials to go with it. Then the king's men went to the
potter Ghatikara and told him: 'Venerable sir, there are five hun-
dred cartloads of red rice stored in the sheaf, and also sauce
materials to go with it, dispatched to you by King Kikl of Kasi;
please accept them.' - "The king is very busy and has much to
do. I have enough. Let this be for the king himself.'[795 ]

23. "Now, Ananda, you may think thus: 'Certainly, someone
else was the brahmin student Jotipala on that occasion.' But it
should not be regarded thus. I was the brahmin student Jotipala
oh that occasion."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.
