###### 82 Ratthapala Sutta

 On Ratthapala

1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kuru town named
Thullakotthita.
2. The brahmin householders of Thullakotthita heard: "The
recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a
Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kuru country [55] with
a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Thullakotthita.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this
effect: 'That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened,
perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of
worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of
gods and humans, enlightened, blessed. He declares this world
with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with
its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he
has himself realised with direct knowledge. He teaches the
Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals
a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.' Now it is good to see
such arahants."

3. Then the brahmin householders of Thullakotthita went to
the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat
down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at
one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation
towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pro-
nounced their name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and
sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
When they were seated, the Blessed One instructed, urged,
roused, and encouraged them with talk on the Dhamma.

4. Now at that time a clansman named Ratthapala, the son of
the leading clan in that same Thullakotthita, was sitting in the
assembly. Then it occurred to him: "As I understand the
Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in
a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a pol-
ished shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the
yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness."
5. Then the brahmin householders of Thullakotthita, having
been instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged by the Blessed
One with talk on the Dhamma, delighted and rejoiced in his
words. They then rose from their [56] seats, and after paying
homage to him, they departed, keeping him on their right.
6. Soon after they had gone, the clansman Ratthapala went to
the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down
at one side and said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, as I
understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not
easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect
and pure as a polished shell. Venerable sir, I wish to shave off
my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from
the home life into homelessness. I would receive the going forth
under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission."
"Have you been permitted by your parents, Ratthapala, to go
forth from the home life into homelessness?"
"No, venerable sir, I have not been permitted by my parents."
"Ratthapala, Tathagatas do not give the going forth to anyone
who does not have his parents' permission."
"Venerable sir, I shall see to it that my parents permit me to go
forth from the home life into homelessness."
7. Then the clansman Ratthapala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on
his right. He went to his parents and told them: "Mother and
father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One,
it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly
perfect and pure as a polished shell. I wish to shave off my hair
and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home
life into homelessness. Give me permission to go forth from the
home life into homelessness."
When he had said this, his parents replied: "Dear Ratthapala,
you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have been raised
in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know nothing of suffer-

ing, dear Ratthapala. [57] Even in case of your death we would
lose you unwillingly, so how could we give you our permission
to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are
still living?"
For the second time...For the third time the clansman Rattha-
pala said to his parents: "Mother and father...give me permis-
sion to go forth from the home life into homelessness."
For the third time his parents replied: "Dear Ratthapala...how
could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life
into homelessness while you are still living?"
Then, not receiving his parents' permission to go forth, the
clansman Ratthapala lay down there on the bare floor, saying:
"Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth." [58]
8. Then the clansman Ratthapala's parents said to him: "Dear
Ratthapala, you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have
been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know noth-
ing of suffering, dear Ratthapala. Get up, dear Ratthapala, eat,
drink, and amuse yourself. While eating, drinking, and amusing
yourself, you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and mak-
ing merit. We do not permit you to go forth from the home life
into homelessness. Even in the case of your death we would lose
you unwillingly, so how could we give you our permission to go
forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still liv-
ing?" When this was said, the clansman Ratthapala was silent.
For the second time.. .For the third time his parents said to him:
"Dear Ratthapala...how could we give you our permission to go
forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still
living?" For the third time the clansman Ratthapala was silent.
9. Then the clansman Ratthapala's parents went to his friends
and said to them: "Dears, the clansman Ratthapala has lain
down on the bare floor, having said: 'Right here I shall either die"
or receive the going forth.' Come, dears, go to the clansman
Ratthapala and say to him: 'Friend Ratthapala, you are your par-
ents' only son...Get up, friend Ratthapala, eat, drink, and amuse
your self... [59] how could your parents give you their permis-
sion to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you
are still living?'"
10. Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to him and
said: "Friend Ratthapala, you are your parents' only son, dear
and beloved. You have been raised in comfort, brought up in

comfort; you know nothing of suffering, friend Ratthapala. Get
up, friend Ratthapala, eat, drink, and amuse yourself. While eat-
ing, drinking, and amusing yourself, you can be happy enjoying
sensual pleasures and making merit. Your parents do not permit
you to go forth from the home life into homelessness. Even in
case of your death they would lose you unwillingly, so how
could they give you their permission to go forth from the home
life into homelessness while you are still living?" When this was
said, the clansman Ratthapala was silent.
For the second time.. .For the third time his friends said to him:
"Friend Ratthapala.. .how could they give you their permission to
go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still
living?" For the third time the clansman Ratthapala was silent.
11. Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to his parents
and said to them: "Mother and father, the clansman Ratthapala
is lying down there on the bare floor, having said: 'Right here I
shall either die or [60] get the going forth.' Now if you do not
give him your permission to go forth from the home life into
homelessness, he will die there. But if you give him your per-
mission, you will see him after he has gone forth. And if he does
not enjoy the going forth, what else can he do then but return
here? So give him your permission to go forth from the home
life into homelessness."
"Then, dears, we give the clansman Ratthapala permission to
go forth from the home life into homelessness. But when he has
gone forth, he must visit his parents."
Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to him and told
him: "Get up, friend Ratthapala. Your parents permit you to go
forth from the home life into homelessness. But when you have
gone forth, you must visit your parents."
12. The clansman Ratthapala then got up, and when he had
regained his strength, he went to the Blessed One, and after pay-
ing homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:
"Venerable sir, I have my parents' permission to go forth from
the home life into homelessness. Let the Blessed One give me
the going forth." Then the clansman Ratthapala received the
going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full
admission.[796 ]

13. Then not long after the venerable Ratthapala had r e c e i v e d
the full admission, a half-month after he had received the full

admission, the Blessed One, having stayed at Thullakotthita as
long as he chose, set out to wander towards Savatthl. Wan-
dering by stages, he eventually arrived at Savatthl, and there

[61] he lived at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
14. Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and
resolute, the venerable Ratthapala, by realising for himself with
direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen right-
ly go forth from the home life into homelessness.[797] He directly
knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to
be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of
being." And the venerable Ratthapala became one of the arahants.
15. Then the venerable Ratthapala went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
told him: "Venerable sir, I wish to visit my parents, if I have the
Blessed One's permission."
Then the Blessed One penetrated mentally the thoughts in
venerable Ratthapala's mind. When he knew that the clansman
Ratthapala was incapable of abandoning the training and
returning to the low life, he told him: "Now is the time,
Ratthapala, to do as you think fit."
16. Then the venerable Ratthapala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on
his right. He then set his resting place in order, and taking his
bowl and outer robe, set out to wander towards Thullakotthita.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Thullakotthita.
There he lived in Thullakotthita in King Koravya's Migacira
Garden. Then, when it was morning, he dressed, and taking his
bowl and outer robe, went into Thullakotthita for alms. As he
was wandering for alms from house to house in Thullakotthita,
he came to his own father's house.
17. Now on that occasion the venerable Ratthapala's father
was sitting in the hall of the central door having his hair
dressed. When he saw the venerable Ratthapala coming in the
distance, he said: "Our only son, dear and beloved, was made to
go forth by these bald-pated recluses." [62] Then at his own
father's house the venerable Ratthapala received neither alms
nor a polite refusal; instead, he received only abuse.
18. Just then a slavewoman belonging to one of his relatives
was about to throw away some old porridge.[798] Seeing this, the

682 _a a a a Sutta: Sutta 8_ ii 6

venerable Ratthapala said to her: "Sister, if that stuff is to be
thrown away, then pour it into my bowl here."
While she was doing so, she recognised the characteristic fea-
tures of his hands, his feet, and his voice. Then she went to his
mother and said: "Please know, my lady, that my lord's son
Ratthapala has arrived."
"Gracious! If what you say is true, you are no longer a slave!"
Then the venerable Ratthapala's mother went to his father and
said: "Please know, householder, they say that the clansman
Ratthapala has arrived."
19. Just then the venerable Ratthapala was eating the old por-
ridge by the wall of a certain shelter. His father went to him and
said: "Ratthapala, my dear, surely there is.. .and you will be eat-
ing old porridge![799] Is there not your own house to go to?"
"How could we have a house, householder, when we have
gone forth from the home life into homelessness? We are home-
less, householder. We went [63] to your house, but we received
neither alms nor a polite refusal there; instead we received
only abuse."
"Come, dear Ratthapala, let us go to the house."
"Enough, householder, my meal for today is finished."
"Then, dear Ratthapala, consent to accept tomorrow's meal."
The venerable Ratthapala consented in silence.
20. Then, knowing that the venerable Ratthapala had consent-
ed, his father went back to his own house where he had gold
coins and bullion made into a large heap and covered it with
mats. Then he told the venerable Ratthapala's former wives:
"Come, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves with ornaments in
the way Ratthapala found you most dear and loveable."
21. When night had ended, the venerable Ratthapala's father
had good food of various kinds prepared in his own house and
had the time announced to the venerable Ratthapala: "It is time,
dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready."
22. Then, it being morning, the venerable Ratthapala dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to his own father's
house and sat down on the seat made ready. Then his father had
the pile of gold coins and bullion uncovered and said: "Dear
Ratthapala, this is your maternal fortune; your paternal fortune
is another and your ancestral fortune is yet another. Dear
Ratthapala, you can enjoy the wealth and make merit. Come

then, dear, [64] abandon the training and return to the low life,
enjoy the wealth and make merit,"
"Householder, if you would follow my advice, then have this
pile of gold coins and bullion loaded on carts and carried away
to be dumped midstream in the river Ganges. Why is that?
Because, householder, on account of this there will arise for you
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair."
23. Then the venerable Ratthapala's former wives clasped his
feet and said to him: "What are they like, my lord's son, the
nymphs for whose sake you lead the holy life?"
"We do not lead the holy life for the sake of nymphs, sisters."
"Our lord's son Ratthapala calls us 'sisters,'" they cried and
right there they fainted.
24. Then the venerable Ratthapala told his father: "Householder,
if there is a meal to be given, then give it. Do not harass us."
"Eat then, dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready."
Then, with his own hands, the venerable Ratthapala's father
served and satisfied him with the various kinds of good food.
When the venerable Ratthapala had eaten and had withdrawn
his hand from the bowl, he stood up and uttered these stanzas:

25. "Behold a puppet here pranked out, [800 ]
A body built up out of sores,
Sick, an object for concern,
Where no stability abides.

Behold a figure here pranked out
With jewellery and earrings too,
A skeleton wrapped up in skin,
Made attractive by its clothes.

Its feet adorned with henna dye
And powder smeared upon its face:
It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore. [65]

Its hair is dressed in eightfold plaits
And unguent smeared upon its eyes:
It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore.

A filthy body well adorned
Like a new-painted unguent pot:
It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore.

The deer-hunter set out the snare
But the deer did not spring the trap;
We ate the bait and now depart
Leaving the hunters to lament."

26. After the venerable Ratthapala had stood up and uttered
these stanzas, he went to King Koravya's Migaclra garden and
sat down at the root of a tree for the day's abiding.
27. Then King Koravya addressed his gamekeeper thus: "Good
gamekeeper, tidy up the Migaclra Garden so that we may go to
the pleasure garden to see a pleasing spot." - "Yes, sire," he
replied. Now while he was tidying up the Migaclra Garden, the
gamekeeper saw the venerable Ratthapala seated at the root of a
tree for the day's abiding. When he saw him, he went to King
Koravya and told him: "Sire, the Migaclra Garden has been tidied
up. The clansman Ratthapala is there, the son of the leading clan
in this same Thullakotthita, of whom you have always spoken
highly;[801] he is seated at the root of a tree for the day's abiding."
"Then, good Migava, enough of the pleasure garden for today.
Now we shall go to pay respects to that Master Ratthapala."
28. Then, saying: "Give away all the food that has been pre-
pared there," King Koravya had a number of state carriages pre-
pared, and mounting one of them, accompanied by the other
carriages, he drove out from Thullakotthita with the full pomp
of royalty to see the venerable Ratthapala. He drove thus as far
as the road was passable for carriages, and then he dismounted
from his carriage and went forward on foot with a following of
the most eminent officials to where the venerable Ratthapala
was. [66] He exchanged greetings with the venerable Rattha-
pala, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he
stood at one side and said: "Here is an elephant rug. Let Master
Ratthapala be seated on it."
"There is no need, great king. Sit down. I am sitting on my
own mat."

King Koravya sat down on a seat made ready and said:
29. "Master Ratthapala, there are four kinds of loss. Because
they have undergone these four kinds of loss, some people here
shave off their hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go
forth from the home life into homelessness. What are the four?
They are loss through ageing, loss through sickness, loss of
wealth, and loss of relatives.
30. "And what is loss through ageing? Here, Master Rattha-
pala, someone is old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in
life, come to the last stage. He considers thus: 'I am old, aged,
burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage. It
is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth or to
augment wealth already acquired. Suppose I shave off my hair
and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home
life into homelessness.' Because he has undergone that loss
through ageing, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the
yellow robe, and goes forth from the home life into homeless-
ness. This is called loss through ageing. But Master Ratthapala
is now still young, a black-haired young man endowed with the
blessing of youth, in the prime of life. Master Ratthapala has
not undergone any loss through ageing. What has he known or
seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into
homelessness?

31. "And what is loss through sickness? Here, Master
Ratthapala, someone is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill. He
considers thus: 'I am afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill. It is no
longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth...[67]...into
homelessness.' Because he has undergone that loss through sick-
ness...he goes forth from the home life into homelessness. This
is called loss through sickness. But Master Ratthapala now is
free from illness and affliction; he possesses a good digestion
that is neither too cool nor too warm but medium. Master
Ratthapala has not undergone any loss through sickness. What
has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the
home life into homelessness?
32. "And what is loss of wealth? Here, Master Ratthapala,
someone is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions. Gradually
his wealth dwindles away. He considers thus: 'Formerly I was
rich, of great wealth, of great possessions. Gradually my
wealth has dwindled away. It is no longer easy for me to

acquire unacquired wealth...into homelessness.' Because he has
undergone that loss of wealth...he goes forth from the home life
into homelessness. This is called loss of wealth. But Master
Ratthapala is the son of the leading clan in this same Thulla-
kotthita. Master Ratthapala has not undergone any loss of
wealth. What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone
forth from the home life into homelessness?
33. "And what is loss of relatives? Here, Master Ratthapala,
someone has many friends and companions, kinsmen and rela-
tives. Gradually those relatives of his dwindle away. He considers
thus: 'Formerly I had many friends and companions, kinsmen
and relatives. Gradually those relatives of mine have dwindled
away. It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired
wealth... [68].. .into homelessness.' Because he has undergone that
loss of relatives...he goes forth from the home life into home-
lessness. This is called loss of relatives. But Master Ratthapala
has many friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, in
this same Thullakotthita. Master Ratthapala has not undergone
any loss of relatives. What has he known or seen or heard that
he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?
34. "Master Ratthapala, these are the four kinds of loss.
Because they have undergone these four kinds of loss, some
people here shave off their hair and beard, put on the yellow
robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness. Master
Ratthapala has not undergone any of these. What has he known
or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into
homelessness?"
35. "Great king, there are four summaries of the Dhamma that
have been taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. Knowing and seeing and
hearing them, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
What are the four?
36. (1) '"[Life in] any world is unstable, it is swept away':[802 ]
this is the first summary of the Dhamma taught by the Blessed
One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Knowing and seeing and hearing this, I went forth from the
home life into homelessness. g o 3
(2) '"[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector':
this is the second summary of the Dhamma taught by the
Blessed One who knows and sees...

(3) "'[Life in] any world has nothing of its own; one has to
leave all and pass on': [8 0 4] this is the third summary of the
Dhamma taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees...
(4) '"[Life in] any world is incomplete, insatiate, the slave of
craving':[805] this is the fourth summary of the Dhamma taught by
the Blessed One who knows and sees...
37. "Great king, these are the four summaries of the Dhamma
that have been taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. [69] Knowing and seeing
and hearing them, I went forth from the home life into home-
lessness."
38. "Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world is unstable, it
is swept away.' How should the meaning of that statement be
understood?"
"What do you think, great king? When you were twenty or
twenty-five years old, were you an expert rider of elephants, an
expert horseman, an expert charioteer, an expert archer, an expert
swordsman, strong in thighs and arms, sturdy, capable in battle?"
"When I was twenty or twenty-five years old, Master
Ratthapala, I was an expert rider of elephants...strong in thighs
and arms, sturdy, capable in battle. Sometimes I wonder if I had
supernormal power then. I do not see anyone who could equal
me in strength."
"What do you think, great king? Are you now as strong in
thighs and arms, as sturdy and as capable in battle?"
"No, Master Ratthapala. Now I am old, aged, burdened with
years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; my years have
turned eighty. Sometimes I mean to put my foot here and I put
my foot somewhere else."
"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world is unstable, it is swept away'; and when I
knew and saw and heard this, I went forth from the home life
into homelessness."
"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world is
unstable, it is swept away.' It is indeed so!
39. "Master Ratthapala, there exist in this court elephant
troops and cavalry and chariot troops and infantry, which will

serve to subdue any threats to us. [70] Now Master Ratthapala
said: '[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector.' How
should the meaning of that statement be understood?"
"What do you think, great king? Do you have any chronic
ailment?"
"I have a chronic wind ailment, Master Ratthapala. Sometimes
my friends and companions, kinsmen, and relatives, stand
around me, thinking: 'Now King Koravya is about to die, now
King Koravya is about to die!'"
"What do you think, great king? Can you command your
friends and companions, your kinsmen and relatives: 'Come,
my good friends and companions, my kinsmen and relatives.
All of you present share this painful feeling so that I may feel
less pain'? Or do you have to feel that pain yourself alone?"
"I cannot command my friends and companions, my kins-
men and relatives thus, Master Ratthapala. I have to feel that
pain alone."
"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector'; and when I
knew and saw and heard this, I went forth from the home life
into homelessness."
"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '{Life in] any world
has no shelter and no protector.' It is indeed so!
40. "Master Ratthapala, there exist in this court abundant gold
coins and bullion stored away in vaults and depositories. Now
Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world has nothing of its
own; one has to leave all and pass on.' How should the meaning
of that statement be understood?"
"What do you think, great king? You now [71] enjoy yourself
provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure,
but will you be able to have it of the life to come: 'Let me like-
wise enjoy myself provided and endowed with these same five
cords of sensual pleasure'? Or will others take over this property,
while you will have to pass on according to your actions?"
"I cannot have it thus of the life to come, Master Ratthapala.
On the contrary, others will take over this property while I shall
have to pass on according to my actions."

"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world has nothing of its own; one has to leave all
and pass on'; and when I knew and saw and heard this, I went
forth from the home life into homelessness."
"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world
has nothing of its own; one has to leave all and pass on.' It is
indeed so!
41. "Now Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world is
incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving.' How should the
meaning of that statement be understood?"
"What do you think, great king? Do you reign over the rich
Kuru country?"
"Yes, Master Ratthapala, I do."
"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and
reliable man came to you from the east and said: 'Please know,
great king, that I have come from the east, and there I saw a
large country, powerful and rich, very populous and crowded
with people. There are plenty of elephant troops there, plenty of
cavalry, chariot troops and infantry; there is plenty of ivory
there, and plenty of gold coins and bullion both unworked and
worked, and plenty of women for wives. With your present
forces you can conquer it. Conquer it then, great king.' What
would you do?" [72]
"We would conquer it and reign over it, Master Ratthapala."
"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and
reliable man came to you from the west...from the north...from
the south and said: 'Please know, great king, that I have come
from the south, and there 1 saw a large country, powerful and
rich.. .Conquer it then, great king.' What would you do?"
"We would conquer it too and reign over it, Master Ratthapala."
"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world is incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving';
and when I knew and saw and heard this, I went forth from the
home life into homelessness."
"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and

sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world is
incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving.' It is indeed so!"
42. That is what the venerable Ratthapala said. And having
said that he said further:

"I see men wealthy in the world, who yet
From ignorance give not their gathered wealth.
Greedily they hoard away their riches
Longing still for further sensual pleasures.

A king who has conquered the earth by force
And rules over the land the ocean bounds
Is yet unsated with the sea's near shore
And hungers for its further shore as well. [73]

Most other people too, not just a king,
Encounter death with craving unabated;

[With plans] still incomplete they leave the corpse;
Desires remain unsated in the world.

His relatives lament and rend their hair,
Crying, 'Ah me! Alas! Our love is dead!'
They bear away the body wrapped in shrouds
To place it on a pyre and burn it there.

Clad in a shroud, he leaves his wealth behind,
Prodded with stakes he burns [upon the pyre].
And as he dies, no relatives or friends
Can offer him shelter and refuge here.

While his heirs take over his wealth, this being
Must pass on according to his actions;
And as he dies nothing can follow him;
Not child nor wife nor wealth nor royal estate.

Longevity is not acquired with wealth
Nor can prosperity banish old age;
Short is this life, as all the sages say,
Eternity it knows not, only change.

The rich and poor alike shall feel [Death's] touch,
The fool and sage as well shall feel it too;
But while the fool lies stricken by his folly,
No sage will ever tremble at the touch.

Better is wisdom here than any wealth,
Since by wisdom one gains the final goal.
For people through ignorance do evil deeds
While failing to reach the goal from life to life.

As one goes to the womb and the next world,
Renewing the successive round of births,
Another of little wisdom, trusting him,
Goes also to the womb and the next world. [74]

Just as a robber caught in burglary
Is made to suffer for his evil deed,
So people after death, in the next world,
Are made to suffer for their evil deeds.

Sensual pleasures, varied, sweet, delightful,
In many different ways disturb the mind:
Seeing the danger in these sensual ties
I chose to lead the homeless life, O King.

As fruits fall from the tree, so people too,
Both young and old, fall when this body breaks.
Seeing this too, O King, I have gone forth:
Better is the recluse's life assured."
