# The Book of Causation

The Book of Causation (Nidānavagga) is the second of the
five books of the Linked Discourses. It is named after the first and
longest section, the Nidāna Saṁyutta. This
deals with causation through the core Buddhist teaching of dependent
origination, which explains how rebirth happens without a soul. The next
three *saṁyuttas* can be seen as appendices to the Book of
Causation, dealing with the elimination of the suffering of
transmigration ([SN 13](https://suttacentral.net/sn13)), various sets of
conditioned elements ([SN 14](https://suttacentral.net/sn14)), and the
unknowability of the extent of transmigration ([SN
15](https://suttacentral.net/sn15)). The remaining six
*saṁyuttas* are not related thematically. Instead, they are
mostly grouped by person rather than subject.

The theme of causation runs through all the Buddha's teaching. We find
it in contexts such as meditation practice, societal ills, biological
evolution, medicine, psychological stress, and many more. However, when
we refer to dependent origination we are not speaking about a general
principle of causality---although such a principle is presented at [SN
12\.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.21)---but of a specific series of
conditional links laying bare how suffering originates and how it ends.
As such, it is an extended treatment of the second and third noble
truths ([SN 12.27](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.27)). It integrates
psychological and existential aspects of suffering, showing how, when
bound by craving, we make choices that bind us to transmigrating into
future lives ([SN 12.38](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.38)). The reason
why we have not escaped the process of rebirth is that we do not
understand dependent origination ([SN
12\.60](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.60)). Thus one of the core purposes
of the teaching is to explain how rebirth takes place without speaking
in terms of "me" or "mine" ([SN
12\.37](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.37)).

It is a deeply human need to want to understand how things came to be.
Virtually every religious or spiritual path feels the need to offer some
kind of explanation of where this world came from and what is our place
in it. Such creation myths are found all over the world, and bear
striking resemblances. They speak of a time when the world was formless,
covered in watery darkness, before light appeared and the world took
shape. In the usual way of myths, these stories work at multiple levels,
reflecting both the physical evolution of the planet (macrocosm) and the
growth of an individual in the womb (microcosm).

Long before the Buddha, the Nasadiya Sukta of the Ṛg Veda (10.129) told
the story of creation in a radically new way. It drew upon the motifs of
the classic creation myth---water, darkness, formlessness---but showed
their development with a new emphasis on desire and agency. Creation
evolved not from divine decree, but due to the energies found within.
And we cannot know what came before this process; even the highest God
came afterward.

The Buddha shared the epistemological humility of the Nasadiya Sukta,
insisting that the ultimate origin of things was unknowable ([SN
15\.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn15.1)). Dependent origination, indeed,
took things much further, entirely dispensing with both theology and
mythology. However, it retained the richness and depth of the mythology,
encapsulating within its sparse formulation both immediate experience
and cosmic transmigration.

The Nidāna Saṁyutta begins by stating ([SN
12\.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.1)) and defining ([SN
12\.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.2)) each of the terms in the
standard 12-linked chain, definitions which are assumed to apply
throughout. Remaining discourses iterate on this theme, introducing new
perspectives and formulations. These sometimes vary the standard 12
links, and so can shed light on unexpected nuances and hidden depths.
Here's a summary of the definitions given for the 12 links, together
with some explanatory notes.

Ignorance (*avijjā*)

:   Not understanding the four noble truths. This does not, of course,
    mean ignorance of everyday facts and details. A Buddha or an arahant
    is not omniscient.

Choices (*saṅkhārā*)

:   Intentional acts (*kamma*) of good or bad, which are expressed
    through body, speech, or mind. The Indic term
   *saṅkhāra* may refer to any kind of activity that
    generates a result. It is used in a mundane context for such things
    as construction work. The Vedic ritual is a *saṅkhāra*,
    which was intended to produce a result of benefit in this life or
    the next. In Buddhism, *saṅkhāra* is sometimes used in
    a general sense of "conditioned (and conditioning) phenomena". In
    dependent origination, however, it is defined as moral choices or
    intentions to do good or bad ([SN
    12.51](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.51)). A *saṅkhāra*
    is a force or energy in the mind that propels consciousness towards
    rebirth in a particular state. This may be consciously formulated as
    a wish or aspiration (see [MN 120](https://suttacentral.net/mn120)),
    but is normally unconscious, i.e. born out of ignorance.

Consciousness (*viññāṇa*)

:   The six kinds of sense consciousness. In the suttas, all forms of
    consciousness are regarded as making up the "stream of
    consciousness" (*viññāṇasota*) that is established both
    in this life and the next ([DN 28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28)).
    This consciousness is empowered and directed by the choices that we
    have made.

Name & form (*nāma-rūpa*)

:   "Name" is various mental factors (feeling, perception, contact,
    intention, and application of mind), while "form" is the four
    material elements that make up the body. This is a tricky concept.
    It stems from Upaniṣadic usage, where it refers to the
    various individuated entities in the world, each with their own
    "form" and "name". Each of the rivers on the earth, to take a
    metaphor from the Prasna Upaniṣad (6.5), has its own
    shape, and is called by its own name; but when they return to the
    ocean they lose their names and shapes and are just known as the
    great ocean. The ocean in this metaphor stands for consciousness,
    which in the Upaniṣads is taken to be the eternal and
    infinite divinity of the cosmos. The Buddha directly rebuts this
    idea by showing that consciousness and name & form are dependent on
    each other. In [DN 15](https://suttacentral.net/dn15) *The Great
    Discourse on Causation* (*Mahānidānasutta*), name &
    form is described as the embryo taking shape within the mother's
    womb, while [MN 38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38) *The Longer
    Discourse on the Ending of Craving*
    (*Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhaya*) speaks of how the child then
    grows and matures. Thus it primarily means the individual organism
    with its mental and physical attributes. Since
   *nāma-rūpa* stands in mutual dependence
    with consciousness, however, it is not correct to translate it as
    "mind & body"---mind/body dualism has no place in early Buddhism. It
    was only in much later Abhidhamma texts that
   *nāma-rūpa* came to be used as an umbrella
    term for all mental and physical properties, in which context the
    translation "mind & body" is appropriate.

Six sense fields (*saḷāyatana*)

:   The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. These are treated in
    detail in [SN 35](https://suttacentral.net/sn35)
    Saḷāyatana Saṁyutta. In dependent
    origination they are said to develop and evolve as the individual
    grows up, enabling them to experience the world in ever more
    sophisticated ways. This is the first of four links that, like
    consciousness, are six-fold following the six senses. These
    integrate the process of immediate sense experience within the
    broader context of dependent origination.

Contact (*phassa*)

:   This is the operation of sensory stimuli, when the six sense organs
    are activated and perform their function. It occurs with the coming
    together of the inner sense organ, the outer sense stimulus, and the
    corresponding consciousness. The conscious individual does not exist
    in isolation, but can only live and grow in an environment that
    provides them with stimulation.

Feeling (*vedanā*)

:   The pleasant, painful, or neutral tone that accompanies all
    conscious experiences. Certain kinds of experience are enjoyable,
    others are unpleasant, while some have no particular affect. Note
    that *vedanā* in Buddhism does not refer to feelings in
    the sense of "emotions", which are far more complex.
   *Vedanā* is a fundamental property of all experience,
    and is treated in detail in [SN 36](https://suttacentral.net/sn36)
    Vedana Saṁyutta.

Craving (*taṇhā*)

:   Craving or desire for the six sense stimuli. Here the definition
    follows the theme of the six senses, rather than the definition
    given in the four noble truths, which is craving for future rebirth,
    i.e. sensual craving, craving to continue existence, and craving to
    end existence. In both cases, craving refers to a primal instinct
    that responds to sensory stimuli, seeking to get more pleasure or to
    avoid pain.

Grasping (*upādāna*)

:   Grasping at sensual pleasures, views, religious observances, and
    theories of self. Apart from the first factor, the kinds of grasping
    are more sophisticated than the primal desires of "craving". They
    require the development of thought and language. This represents a
    further stage in the growth of a person, as they mature and become
    fully responsible for their actions. It is for this reason that in
    Buddhism it is primarily mature humans who perform the deeds that
    generate rebirth and shape the course of future lives. Animals or
    children may indeed perform such deeds, but they are less weighty in
    effect.

Continued existence (*bhava*)

:   Existence may be in the sensual realm (*kāma-bhava*),
    the realm of luminous form (*rūpa-bhava*), or the
    formless realm (*arūpa-bhava*). *Bhava* may be
    translated as "existence" or "life". It refers to the ongoing
    process of existence. By grasping at various aspects of the present
    life, beings generate kammic energy in accordance with that. Most
    beings are attached to the sensual realm, but those who have
    practiced advanced meditation may become attached to the realms of
    luminous form (through the four absorptions) or the formless
    (through the formless attainments). Such attachment or grasping
    stimulates and activates these aspects of existence, creating a
    corresponding rebirth. *Bhava* is therefore like a thread that runs
    through the various steps of dependent origination; and indeed, the
    whole of dependent origination is sometimes called the *bhavacakka*,
    the "Wheel of Existence". *Bhava* is a countable noun, so the older
    rendering as "becoming" is incorrect: you can't speak of multiple
    "becomings". Nevertheless, *bhava* has a distinctly pregnant sense.
    While we might long for a life of stable and eternal joy, it is the
    nature of existence that, even as it passes away, it contains the
    seeds for a new life in the future. Thus in [AN
    3.76](https://suttacentral.net/an3.76) the Buddha explains *bhava*
    by saying that "deeds are the field, consciousness is the seed, and
    craving is the moisture" (*kammaṁ khettaṁ,
    viññāṇaṁ bījaṁ, taṇhā sneho*)
    for generating a new life in the future (*āyatiṁ
    punabbhavābhinibbatti*).

Rebirth (*jāti*)

:   The rebirth or conception of the aggregates in the various orders of
    sentient beings. The Pali *jāti* is often translated as
    "birth", but in doctrinal contexts, it always refers to rebirth in
    the sense of reincarnation in a new life. Despite the claims of some
    modern commentators, the suttas never use rebirth as a psychological
    metaphor.

Old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress

:   Old age is the breaking of teeth, wrinkling of skin, and failing of
    the faculties. Death is the laying down of the body at the end of
    life. Like rebirth, old age and death are defined in purely physical
    terms. Psychological suffering is covered by the other terms.

Dependent origination is core to the insight not just of the historical
Buddha Gotama, but of other Buddhas of the past ([SN
12\.4--10](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.4)). His realization was like a
person who stumbles upon an ancient city, lost and overgrown in the
jungle ([SN 12.65](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65)). Thus dependent
origination is not an invention of the Buddha but is a description of a
natural principle, one that operates in the same way whether or not a
Buddha appears ([SN 12.20](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.20)).

The Buddha distinguished between the phenomena that are dependently
originated and the process of dependent origination ([SN
12\.20](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.20)). While all of the dependently
originated phenomena can be seen in the present, the reality of the
process in the past and future must be inferred ([SN
12\.34](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.34)).

This is the difference between knowledge of dependent origination and
the psychic powers of seeing the specific details of past lives and
present rebirths. Such psychic visions arise from deep immersion in
meditation, and are useful but not essential for understanding and
letting go. Dependent origination is not about seeing the specifics of
past and future lives, but understanding the principles by which rebirth
operates. If memories of past lives are like watching a show on TV,
insight into dependent origination is like understanding the science and
technology of how television transmission works. This is why dependent
origination is always regarded as unique and central to Buddhism, while
psychic visions have only a limited role to play.

This conscious body, with its complex systems of mental and physical
processes, was produced due to ignorance and craving in a past life ([SN
12\.19](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.19)). This is how our present
existence came to be. So long as we continue to be trapped in craving
for sensory experience, we repeat the cycle, fueling craving and
generating yet another new body that will be reborn in the future. When
we understand the theory of dependent origination it gives us an opening
for developing insight.

It is, of course, self-evident that all the factors of dependent
origination may be observed in the present. But in terms of the
functioning of the process, we begin by examining the central factors,
the unfolding of sense experience. Gradually we realize that the
implications of what we are seeing are far deeper than the mere present.
Like a scientist who, examining tree rings or ice cores, realizes that
they can make reliable inferences about the deep past, we understand
that the same processes that brought us here will propel us into the
future. And we see that it is that very understanding which is the
beginning of the end for ignorance.

Thus while this teaching is a profoundly philosophical one, it is not
mere theory, but a praxis as well ([SN
12\.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.3)). Its understanding unfolds as a
natural consequence of developing faith in the Dhamma ([SN
12\.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.23)). It is realized by one who has
experiential realization of the Dhamma, commonly known as a
stream-enterer ([SN 12.28](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.28)). This is
true for both monastics ([SN 12.29](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.29))
and lay people ([SN 12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41)). This is
why a noble disciple has no doubts about the meaning or origin of life:
they have seen it for themselves ([SN
12\.49](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.49)). Such an individual is
independent of others and need not rely on a teacher. One need not be a
perfected one (*arahant*) to understand dependent origination ([SN
12\.68](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.68)).

The Buddha illustrates dependent origination with many similes, drawing
imagery from fire, fuel, or food. Focusing on things that give pleasure
tends to stimulate craving, like a fire fueled by dry grass ([SN
12\.52](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.52)) or a tree drawing up sap ([SN
12\.58](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.58)). It is in this collection that
we find the now-classic simile of the mind like a monkey, although the
application is somewhat unexpected ([SN
12\.61](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.61)).

Several suttas take up the idea of conditionality as "food" or "fuel" or
"sustenance" and apply it to a set of four things: solid food, contact,
intention, and consciousness ([SN
12\.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.11)). Each of these is, in turn,
illustrated with similes that are as horrifying as they are
unforgettable ([SN 12.63](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.63)).

While the standard presentation of the 12 links might give the
impression that they occur one after the other, like a series of
dominoes falling down, the reality is more complex. Certain factors,
such as consciousness and name & form, are interdependent, relying on
each other ([SN 12.65](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65)) like two
sheaves of reeds ([SN 12.67](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.67)).
Sometimes a factor might be implied rather than mentioned outright ([SN
12\.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.13)), sometimes the sequence is
altered ([SN 12.43](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.43) and [SN
12\.44](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.44)), while elsewhere the teaching
might be presented in a quite different way ([SN
12\.38](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.38)). Conditionality in Buddhism is
always understood to be complex and ramified: many causes, many effects,
all interacting. The simple schema is not meant to be reductive, but to
clarify crucial aspects of the process in a way that is easily memorized
and understood.

Philosophically, dependent origination is said to be the "middle
teaching" that avoids extreme views. Such extreme views are the polar
opposites that often define philosophical positions. They include views
of moral responsibility: is the person who does the deed identical to
the one who experiences the result? Or is it experienced by a different
person? The Buddha rejects these alternatives: the deed has an effect,
and that effect is suffering ([SN
12\.46](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.46)).

Similarly the Buddha rejects the ideas that "everything exists" or that
"nothing exists" ([SN 12.48](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.48)). While
these notions might seem odd, even bizarre, to our way of thinking, they
stem from the Indian philosophical tendency to see "being" as inherent,
absolute, even divine. Thus if something exists, it exists in an
absolute and essential sense, and if all exists, it means the reality of
the cosmos itself is absolute and eternal. If nothing "exists", it does
not mean that there is nothing real in the world; it means that things
do not have any essence, and so will perish. Thus the Buddha rejects
these opposing views as forms of eternalism and annihilationism, the
ideas that the self will last forever, and that the self will be
destroyed ([SN 12.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.15)).

Finally, perhaps the single most important thing to remember is that
dependent "origination" is only half the picture. Of equal importance is
"cessation", the ending of each of the factors, which is what is called
"extinguishment" (*nibbāna*). The true purpose of studying
dependent origination is not for philosophical mastery, not for winning
debates or passing a course, but for realizing the ending of suffering.
Dependent origination stands as a truly empowering teaching, as it
assumes that human understanding is quite sufficient to comprehend the
essence of existence itself, to find salvation through wisdom.

