# PART THREE: THE FINAL FIFTY DISCOURSES

10\. Devadaha Sutta: At Devadaha. The Buddha examines the Jain thesis that liberation is to be attained by self-mortification, proposing a different account of how striving becomes fruitful.

10\. Pañcattaya Sutta: The Five and Three. A survey of various speculative views about the future and the past and of misconceptions about Nibbāna.

10\. Kinti Sutta: What Do You Think About Me? The Buddha explains how the monks can resolve disagreements about the Dhamma.

10\. Sāmagāma Sutta: At Sāmagāma. The Buddha lays down disciplinary procedures for the guidance of the Sangha to ensure its harmonious functioning after his demise.

10\. Sunakkhatta Sutta: To Sunakkhatta. The Buddha discusses the problem of an individual's overestimation of his progress in meditation.

10\. Āneñjasappāya Sutta: The Way to the Imperturbable. The Buddha explains the approaches to various levels of higher meditative states culminating in Nibbāna.

10\. Ganakamoggallana Sutta: To Ganaka Moggallāna. The Buddha sets forth the gradual training of the Buddhist monk and describes himself as the "shower of the way."

10\. Gopakamoggallana Sutta: With Gopaka Moggallāna. The venerable Ānanda explains how the Sangha maintains its unity and internal discipline after the passing away of the Buddha.

10\. Mahäpunnama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the Fullmoon Night. A bhikkhu questions the Buddha on the five aggregates, clinging, personality view, and the realisation of non-self.

11\. Cūlapunnama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the Fullmoon Night. The Buddha explains the differences between an "untrue man" and a "true man."

11\. Anupada Sutta: One by One As They Occurred. The Buddha describes the venerable Sāriputta's development of insight when he was training for the attainment of arahantship.

11\. Chabbisodhana Sutta: The Sixfold Purity. The Buddha explains how a bhikkhu should be interrogated when he claims final knowledge and how he would answer if his claim is genuine.

11\. Sappurisa Sutta: The True Man. The Buddha distinguishes the character of a true man from that of an untrue man.

11\. Sevitabbāsevitabba Sutta: To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated. The Buddha sets up three brief outlines of things to be cultivated and not to be cultivated, and the venerable Sāriputta fills in the details.

11\. Bahudhātuka Sutta: The Many Kinds of Elements. The Buddha expounds in detail the elements, the sense bases, dependent origination, and the kinds of situations that are possible and impossible in the world.

11\. Isigili Sutta: Isigili: The Gullet of the Seers. An enumeration of the names and epithets of paccekabuddhas who formerly dwelt on the mountain Isigili.

11\. Mahācattärīsaka Sutta: The Great Forty. The Buddha defines the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path and explains their inter-relationships.

11\. Ānäpänasati Sutta: Mindfulness of Breathing. An exposition of sixteen steps in mindfulness of breathing and of the relation of this meditation to the four foundations of mindfulness and the seven enlightenment factors.

11\. Kāyagatāsati Sutta: Mindfulness of the Body. The Buddha explains how mindfulness of the body should be developed and cultivated and the benefits to which it leads.

12\. Sankhārupapatti Sutta: Reappearance by Aspiration. The Buddha teaches how one can be reborn in accordance with one's wish.

12\. Cūlasuññata Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on Voidness. The Buddha instructs Ānanda on the "genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness."

12\. Mahāsuññata Sutta: The Greater Discourse on Voidness. Upon finding that the bhikkhus have grown fond of socialising, the Buddha stresses the need for seclusion in order to abide in voidness.

12\. Acchariya-abbhüta Sutta: Wonderful and Marvellous. At a gathering of bhikkhus the venerable Ānanda recounts the wonderful and marvellous events that preceded and attended the birth of the Buddha.

12\. Bakkula Sutta: Bakkula. The elder disciple Bakkula enumerates his austere practices during his eighty years in the Sangha and exhibits a remarkable death.

12\. Dantabhūmi Sutta: The Grade of the Tamed. By analogy with the taming of an elephant, the Buddha explains how he tames his disciples.

12\. Bhümija Sutta: Bhümija. The Buddha brings forward a series of similes to illustrate the natural fruitfulness of the Noble Eightfold Path.

12\. Anuruddha Sutta: Anuruddha. The venerable Anuruddha clarifies the difference between the immeasurable deliverance of mind and the exalted deliverance of mind.

12\. Upakkilesa Sutta: Imperfections. The Buddha discusses the various impediments to meditative progress he encountered during his quest for enlightenment, with particular reference to the divine eye.

12\. Bälapandita Sutta: Fools and Wise Men. The sufferings of hell and animal life into which a fool is reborn through his evil deeds, and the pleasures of heaven that a wise man reaps through his good deeds.

13\. Devadüta Sutta: The Divine Messengers. The Buddha describes the sufferings of hell that await the evil-doer after death.

13\. Bhaddekaratta Sutta: One Fortunate Attachment.

13\. Ānandabhaddekaratta Sutta: Ānanda and One Fortunate Attachment.

13\. Mahākaccānabhaddekaratta Sutta: Mahā Kaccāna and One Fortunate Attachment.

13\. Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta: Lomasakangiya and One Fortunate Attachment.

The above four suttas all revolve around a stanza spoken by the Buddha emphasising the need for present effort in developing insight into things as they are.

13\. Cūlakammavibhanga Sutta: The Shorter Exposition of Action. The Buddha explains how kamma accounts for the fortune and misfortune of beings.

13\. Mahākammavibhanga Sutta: The Greater Exposition of Action. The Buddha reveals subtle complexities in the workings of kamma that overturn simplistic dogmas and sweeping generalizations.

13\. Salāyatanavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Sixfold Base. The Buddha expounds the six internal and external sense bases and other related topics.

13\. Uddesavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of a Summary. The venerable Mahā Kaccāna elaborates upon a brief saying of the Buddha on the training of consciousness and the overcoming of agitation.

13\. Aranavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Non-conflict. The Buddha gives a detailed discourse on things that lead to conflict and things that lead away from conflict.

14\. Dhātuvibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Elements. Stopping at a potter's workshop for the night, the Buddha meets a monk named Pukkusāti and gives him a profound discourse on the elements culminating in the four foundations of arahantship.

14\. Saccavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Truths. The venerable Sāriputta gives a detailed analysis of the Four Noble Truths.

14\. Dakkhināvibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Offerings. The Buddha enumerates fourteen kinds of personal offerings and seven kinds of offerings made to the Sangha.

14\. Anāthapindikovāda Sutta: Advice to Anāthapiṇ̣ika. The venerable Sāriputta is called to Anāthapiṇ̣ika's deathbed and gives him a stirring sermon on non-attachment.

14\. Channoväda Sutta: Advice to Channa. The venerable Channa, gravely ill, takes his own life despite the attempts of two brother-monks to dissuade him.

14\. Puṇnovāda Sutta: Advice to Puṇna. The bhikkhu Puṇna receives a short exhortation from the Buddha and decides to go live among the fierce people of a remote territory.

14\. Nandakoväda Sutta: Advice from Nandaka. The venerable Nandaka gives the nuns a discourse on impermanence.

14\. Cūlarāhulovāda Sutta: The Shorter Discourse of Advice to Rāhula. The Buddha gives Rāhula a discourse that leads him to the attainment of arahantship.

14\. Chachakka Sutta: The Six Sets of Six. An especially profound and penetrating discourse on the contemplation of all the factors of sense experience as not-self.

14\. Mahāsalāyatanika Sutta: The Great Sixfold Base. How wrong view about the six kinds of sense experience leads to future bondage, while right view about them leads to liberation.

15\. Nagaravindeyya Sutta: To the Nagaravindans. The Buddha explains to a group of brahmin householders what kind of recluses and brahmins should be venerated.

15\. Pindapātapārisuddhi Sutta: The Purification of Almsfood. The Buddha teaches Sāriputta how a bhikkhu should review himself to make himself worthy of almsfood.

15\. Indriyabhāvanā Sutta: The Development of the Faculties. The Buddha explains the supreme development of control over the sense faculties and the arahant's mastery over his perceptions.