
[^181]: This is a denial of the doctrine of kamma. While his doctrine
    appears to be morally nihilistic, it seems unlikely this was
    Pūraṇa Kassapa's full teaching. He may have subscribed
    to hard determinism, so that we have no choice in what we do. He may
    also have believed that we should keep moral rules as a social
    contract, but that this had no effect on the afterlife. \| In such
    contexts, *kar-* means "punish, inflict" ([MN
    129:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn129/en/sujato#29.2)).

[^182]: The unsatisfying nature of the answers given by these teachers
    is also emphasized at [MN
    36:48.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato#48.4).

[^183]: Breadfruit is a starchy, fibrous fruit that is, needless to say,
    very different from a mango.

[^184]: Kings had a duty to protect all religions in their realm, even
    those with such extreme views.

[^185]: The commentary takes *uggahita* and *nikkujjita* as synonyms.
    Elsewhere, however, *nikkujjati* always means "overturns".

[^186]: This denies the principle of causality and the efficacy of
    action. The fatalistic teachings of the Ājīvikas led to
    them becoming popular as prognosticators.

[^187]: The first three phrases, with the Magadhan nominative singular
    in *-e*, are unique to this passage. In [AN
    6.38:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/an6.38/en/sujato#1.4) we find the
    regular nominative form in *-o*. They are omitted in the otherwise
    parallel passage at [MN
    76:13.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn76/en/sujato#13.6).

[^188]: Everything is destined by circumstances beyond our control.

[^189]: This strange cosmology lays out the course through which souls
    must proceed before their final liberation. \| Since
   *nāgāvāsa* ("abode of dragons") occurs in a list of
    kinds of ascetics, I think it is a corruption of
   *naggāvāsa* ("abode of naked ascetics") and translate
    accordingly. Each of these refers to the number of times one will be
    reborn in each of these states. \| *Nigaṇṭhigabbha*
    could mean "rebirth as a Jain ascetic" but here we have moved on
    from listing ascetics, and I think it refers to one who is born free
    of attachments. Compare the Buddhist idea of "four kinds of
    conception" ([DN
    33:1.11.175](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#1.11.175)). \|
   *Pavuṭā* is explained by the commentary as
   *gaṇṭhikā* ("knot"). However, Rig Veda 9.54.2 mentions
    "seven rivers" (*sapta pravata*) that flow from heaven, preceded in
    the same verse by the mention of *sarā* ("lakes"). This
    detail suggests a Vedic influence. The "seven rivers" are normally
    called *sapta sindhu* (Rig Veda 1.35.8) in reference to the river
    systems of north-west India and Pakistan (cf. Punjab, "five
    rivers").

[^190]: To "force unripened deeds to bear their fruit" by means of
    "fervent austerity" (*tapas*) is a Jain practice, whereas to
    "eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little"
    is distinguished from the Jain view at [AN
    3.74](https://suttacentral.net/an3.74/en/sujato).

[^191]: "Purification through transmigration" is
   *saṁsārasuddhi*.

[^192]: The denial of "mother and father" is usually interpreted as the
    denial of moral duty towards one's parents. However, I think it is a
    doctrine of conception which denies that a child is created by the
    mother and father. Rather, the child is produced by the four
    elements, with parents as mere instigators and incubators.

[^193]: This is a materialist analysis of the person. \| The word
   *kāya* ("substance") is central to Jainism.
    Ācārāṅgasūtra 8.1.11 speaks of the "substances" of
    earth, water, fire, and air as being imbued with life so one should
    avoid damaging them. \| The Buddha's use of *mahābhūtā*
    ("principal states") responds to Yājñavalkya's core
    teaching at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.4.12,
    where the several "states" or "real entities"
    (*bhūtā*)---namely the diverse manifestations of
    creation---arise from and dissolve into the "principal state"
    (*mahābhūta*) of the Self, singular and infinite. For
    the Buddha, the "principal states" are themselves plural, as there
    is no underlying singular reality. Later Sanskrit literature lists
    the "five states" (*pañcabhūta*) as earth, water, fire,
    air, and space.

[^194]: This is a reductive atomism. It argues that since all things are
    made of the seven fundamental substances (*kāya*),
    higher-order entities have no significance.

[^195]: Unlike the materialism of Ajita Kesakambala, one of the basic
    substances is the soul. He uses *jīva*, the same term
    used by the Jains, rather than *attā* as preferred by
    the brahmins. Likewise, the Jains held a similar doctrine of six
    uncreated and eternal "substances" (*kāya* or
   *dravya*): soul, the media for motion and rest, matter, space, and
    time.

[^196]: Compare [AN
    8.16:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an8.16/en/sujato#1.3).

[^197]: While this is a genuine Jain teaching, it has not been
    identified as a "fourfold restraint". [DN
    25:16.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato#16.3) preserves
    another "fourfold restraint" that is closer to that found in
    Jainism. At [MN
    12:44.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#44.1) the Buddha
    says he once practiced a "four-factored spiritual path" that
    consisted of Jain-like austerities.

[^198]: At Isibhāsiyāiṁ 29.19, Vardhamāna
    (Mahāvīra) teaches that a sage is
   *savva-vārīhiṁ vārie*, "restrained in all
    restraints", which clearly parallels our current passage. In that
    passage, "restraint" refers to stopping the influx of defilements
    through the five senses, neither delighting in the pleasant nor
    loathing the unpleasant. Similarly we find
   *vāriya-savva-vāri* in the commentary to
    Sūyagaḍa 1.6.28. \| Read *vāri* as future
    passive participle (cf. Sanskrit *vārya*). \| *Dhuta*
    in the sense "shaken off (evil by means of ascetic practices)" is a
    characteristic Jain term. \| For *sabbavāriphuṭo*
    compare *ophuṭo* at [MN
    99:15.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#15.5). In both
    cases *phuṭ* appears in a string of terms from the root
   *var*, and is possibly a corrupted form, or at least has the same
    meaning.

[^199]: This places him among the "endless flip-floppers" of [DN
    1:2.23.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.23.1). However,
    we do not know on which of the four grounds he justified his
    evasiveness.

[^200]: The Buddha answers directly, with confidence. This whole passage
    is a masterclass in effective dialogue.

[^201]: He engages Ajātasattu rather than lecturing him.

[^202]: See *mukhaṁ ullokentī* at [MN
    79](https://suttacentral.net/mn79/en/sujato) and [SN
    56.39](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.39/en/sujato).

[^203]: Even a servant believed in the doctrine of kamma.

[^204]: There is no question of the divinity of kings.

[^205]: The doctrine of kamma leads to living a better life, not stewing
    in resentment.

[^206]: [Kd
    1:47.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#47.1.1)
    penalizes the ordination of bondservants or slaves, despite the fact
    that Ajātasattu's father, Bimbisāra, had
    ordered that no action was to be taken against any bondservant who
    ordained under the Buddha.

[^207]: Here the Buddha foreshadows the larger themes detailed later.

[^208]: Even under a king so compromised as Ajātasattu, a
    runaway slave who has ordained is rewarded not punished.

[^209]: In contrast with the former teachers, the Buddha gives a clear
    answer in terms that Ajātasattu would understand.

[^210]: The Buddha establishes common ground with the king before
    venturing into deeper waters.

[^211]: By starting with a very basic and obvious fruit, the Buddha
    stimulates Ajātasattu to seek a deeper answer.

[^212]: *Karakārako rāsivaḍḍhako* is a unique
    phrase. For *karakāraka*, compare [MN
    57:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn57/en/sujato#2.3), where a naked
    ascetic "does a hard thing". *Rāsi* means "heap" (of
    grain or wealth according to the commentary).

[^213]: The bonded servant had no wealth or family to renounce, but the
    worker does.

[^214]: Having established the king's genuine interest and
    understanding, the Buddha prepares him for the long discourse to
    follow.

[^215]: This is the start of the teaching on the Gradual Training,
    encompassing ethics (*sīla*), meditation
    (*samādhi*), and wisdom (*paññā*). Only
    the ethics portion appeared in the Brahmajālasutta,
    while all three are restated in all the remaining suttas of this
    chapter, although in truncated form. \| It is exceedingly rare for a
    Buddha to appear.

[^216]: The Buddha realizes the truth by his own understanding, not
    through divine intervention or other metaphysical means.

[^217]: It is good when first heard, when practicing, and when one has
    realized the fruits.

[^218]: The word "householder" (*gahapati*) informally refers to any lay
    person, but more specifically indicates someone who owns a house,
    i.e. a person of standing. The renunciate life is not just for
    slaves or workers wishing to escape their station.

[^219]: This serves as a table of contents for the teachings to come. \|
    Nowadays, the "monastic code" (*pātimokkha*) means the
    list of rules for monks and nuns found in the
    Vinayapiṭaka. In the early texts, however, it has three
    main meanings. Sometimes it does refer to the list of rules, as at
    [AN 10.36:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/an10.36/en/sujato#1.6). Here
    it refers to the code of conduct that follows, which is a
    non-legalistic set of guidelines that preceded the
    Vinayapiṭaka. At [DN
    14:3.28.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.28.1) it refers
    to the verses summarizing monastic conduct known as the
    "Ovāda Pātimokkha".

[^220]: While the precept includes any living creature, if a monastic
    murders a human being they are immediately and permanently expelled.

[^221]: To steal anything of substantial value is an expulsion offence.

[^222]: Buddhist monastics are forbidden from any form of sexual
    activity. To engage in penetrative intercourse is an expulsion
    offence.

[^223]: While any form of lying is forbidden, if a monastic falsely
    claims states of enlightenment or deep meditation they are expelled.

[^224]: To avoid sleeping too much.

[^225]: This is the first step in the Buddha's answer to
    Ajātasattu. This is the sense of happiness and
    well-being that you have when you know you have done nothing wrong
    for which anyone might blame you. It is the psychological foundation
    for meditation.

[^226]: Here begins the series of practices that build on moral
    fundamentals to lay the groundwork for meditation.

[^227]: It is not that one cannot see things, but that, mindful of its
    effect, one avoids unnecessary stimulation. \| "Covetousness and
    bitterness" (*abhijjhā domanassā*) are the
    strong forms of desire and aversion caused by lack of restraint.

[^228]: Their happiness deepens, as they see that not only their actions
    but also their mind is becoming free of anything unwholesome.

[^229]: Situational awareness is a psychological term popularized in the
    1990s. It has to do with the perception of environmental phenomena
    and the comprehension of their meaning, which is very close to the
    sense of the Pali term *sampajañña*.

[^230]: These acts describe the daily life of a mendicant: going into
    the village for alms, at which time there are many distracting
    sights. Then they return, eat their meal, and spend their day in
    meditation.

[^231]: A Buddhist monk has three robes: a lower robe (sabong or
    sarong), an upper robe, and an outer cloak.

[^232]: These are the prerequisite conditions for embarking on deep
    meditation.

[^233]: For *parimukha* ("in their presence") we find *pratimukha* in
    Sanskrit, which can mean "presence" or the reflection of the face.
    Late canonical Pali explains *parimukha* as "the tip of the nose or
    the reflection of the face (*mukhanimitta*)". *Parimukha* in
    Sanskrit is rare, but it appears in Pāṇini 4.4.29,
    which the commentary illustrates with the example of a servant "in
    the presence" of their master (cp. [SN
    47.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.8/en/sujato)). So it seems the
    sense is "before the face" or more generally "in the presence". \|
    To "establish mindfulness" (*satiṁ
    upaṭṭhapetvā*) is literally to "do
    satipaṭṭhāna".

[^234]: Covetousness (*abhijjha*) has been curbed by sense restraint,
    and now is fully abandoned.

[^235]: Likewise ill will (*byāpādapadosa*), which was
    called *domanassa* in the formula for sense restraint.

[^236]: "Mindfulness and situational awareness" has a prominent role in
    abandoning dullness.

[^237]: Restlessness hankers for the future and is countered by
    contentment. Remorse digs up the past and is countered by ethical
    purity.

[^238]: The meditator set out on their path after gaining faith in the
    Buddha.

[^239]: The happiness of meditation is hard to understand without
    practicing, so the Buddha gives a series of five similes to
    illustrate in terms Ajātasattu would understand.

[^240]: The five hindrances remain a pillar of meditation teaching. The
    root sense means to "obstruct" but also to "obscure, darken, veil".

[^241]: Each simile illustrates not the happiness of acquisition, but of
    letting go.

[^242]: The Buddha did not emphasize technical details of technique, but
    the emotional wholeness and joy that leads to deep meditation.

[^243]: *Jhāna* is a state of "elevated consciousness"
    (*adhicitta*), so all the terms have an elevated sense. \| The
    plural form indicates that "sensual pleasures" includes sense
    experience, which the meditator can turn away from since they no
    longer have any desire for it. \| The "unskillful qualities" are the
    five hindrances. \| The "rapture and bliss born of seclusion" is the
    happiness of abandoning the hindrances and freedom from sense
    impingement. \| "Placing the mind and keeping it connected"
    (*vitakka*, *vicāra*) uses terms that mean "thought" in
    coarse consciousness, but which in "elevated consciousness" refer to
    the subtle function of applying the mind to the meditation.

[^244]: As a meditator proceeds, their subjective experience of the
    "body" evolves from tactile sense impressions
    (*phoṭṭhabba*), to the interior mental experience of
    bliss and light (*manomayakāya*), to the direct
    personal realization of highest truth ([MN
    70:23.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn70/en/sujato#23.2):
   *kāyena ceva paramasaccaṁ sacchikaroti*).

[^245]: The kneading is the "placing the mind and keeping it connected",
    the water is bliss, while the lack of leaking speaks to the
    contained interiority of the experience. \| Here as elsewhere, water
    is used as a metaphor for the mind in absorption. Compare
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.32: "He becomes
    like water, one, the seer without duality; this is the world of
    Brahmā."

[^246]: The Buddha has answered Ajātasattu's question. But
    he is far from finished.

[^247]: Each *jhāna* begins as the least refined aspect of
    the previous *jhāna* ends. This is not consciously
    directed, but describes the natural process of settling. The
    meditator is now fully confident and no longer needs to apply their
    mind: it is simply still and fully unified.

[^248]: The simile emphasizes the water as bliss, while the lack of
    inflow expresses containment and unification.

[^249]: The water welling up is the rapture, which is the uplifting
    emotional response to the experience of bliss.

[^250]: The emotional response to bliss matures from the subtle thrill
    of rapture to the poise of equanimity. Mindfulness is present in all
    states of deep meditation, but with equanimity it becomes prominent.

[^251]: The meditator is utterly immersed in stillness and bliss.

[^252]: The emotional poise of equanimity leads to the feeling of
    pleasure settling into the more subtle neutral feeling. Pain and
    sadness have been abandoned long before, but are emphasized here as
    they are subtle counterpart of pleasure.

[^253]: The equanimity of the fourth *jhāna* is not
    dullness and indifference, but a brilliant and radiant awareness.

[^254]: The white cloth is the purity and brightness of equanimity. The
    commentary explains this as a person who has just got out of a bath
    and sits perfectly dry and content.

[^255]: Of the eight kinds of knowledge and vision, only the last is
    considered indispensable. The fourth *jhāna* is the
    ideal basis for developing higher knowledges, although elsewhere the
    canon shows that even the first *jhāna* can be a basis
    for liberating insight. Without *jhāna*, however, the
    eightfold path is incomplete and liberating insight is impossible.
    \| The verb *abhininnāmeti* ("extend") indicates that
    the meditator comes out of full immersion like a tortoise sticking
    out its limbs ([SN
    35.240:1.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.240/en/sujato#1.7)).

[^256]: This is the "coarse" (*olārika*) body. Note that
    its generation by mother and father contradicts the doctrine of
    Ajita Kesakambala. The obvious impermanence of the body invites the
    tempting but fallacious notion that the mind or soul is permanent,
    which is dispelled by deeper insight.

[^257]: This distinction should not be mistaken for mind-body dualism.
    These are not fundamental substances but experiences of a meditator.

[^258]: Strung gems were loved in India from the time in the Harappan
    civilization, millennia before the Buddha.

[^259]: This form of "knowledge and vision" is rarely mentioned, being
    found only here, at [DN
    10:2.21.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn10/en/sujato#2.21.3), and at
    [MN 77:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#29.2). The next
    realization, the "mind-made body" is also only found in these three
    suttas. \| The Mahāsaṅgīti edition adds the spurious
    title *vipassanāñāṇa* ("insight knowledge") to this
    section. This term does not appear anywhere in the Pali canon.

[^260]: The "mind-made body" is the interior mental representation of
    the physical body. In ordinary consciousness it is proprioception,
    which here is enhanced by the power of meditation. The higher powers
    in Buddhism are regarded as extensions and evolutions of aspects of
    ordinary experience, not as metaphysical realities separate from the
    world of mundane experience.

[^261]: This is similar to the experience of the "astral body" described
    by modern spiritualists. Note that it is still "physical"
    (*rūpī*) even though it is mind-made. This is the
    subtle (*sukhuma*) body, which is an energetic experience of
    physical properties by the mind.

[^262]: Here begin the "six direct knowledges"
    (*chaḷabhiññā*), which are found commonly throughout
    the early texts. \| "Psychic powers" (*iddhi*) were much cultivated
    in the Buddha's day, but the means to acquire them varied: devotion
    to a god, brutal penances, or magic rituals. The Buddha taught that
    the mind developed in *samādhi* was capable of things
    that are normally incomprehensible.

[^263]: Only a few of these are attested as events in the early texts.
    The most common is the ability to disappear and reappear, exhibited
    by the Buddha ([AN
    8.30:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato#2.1)), some
    disciples ([MN
    37:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#6.1)), and deities
    ([MN 67:8.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn67/en/sujato#8.1)).

[^264]: These similes hark back to the descriptions of the purified mind
    as pliable and workable.

[^265]: This simile is extended in detail at [AN
    3.101](https://suttacentral.net/an3.101/en/sujato).

[^266]: "Clairaudience" is a literal rendition of *dibbasota*. The root
    sense of *dibba* is to "shine" like the bright sky or a divine
    being. The senses of clarity and divinity are both present.

[^267]: The Buddha occasionally used this ability for teaching, as at
    [MN 75:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn75/en/sujato#6.1).

[^268]: The simile emphasizes the clarity and distinctness of the
    sounds. Compare [AN
    4.114](https://suttacentral.net/an4.114/en/sujato):
   *bheripaṇavasaṅkhatiṇavaninnādasaddānaṁ*.

[^269]: Note that the Indic idiom is not the "reading" of minds, which
    suggests hearing the words spoken in inner dialogue. While this is
    exhibited by the Buddha (eg. [AN
    8.30:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/an8.30/en/sujato#2.1)), the main
    emphasis is on the comprehension of the overall state of mind.

[^270]: Again the simile emphasizes how clear and direct the experience
    is. Without deep meditation, we have some intuitive sense for the
    minds of others, but it is far from clear.

[^271]: Here begins the "three knowledges" (*tevijjā*), a
    subset of the six direct knowledges. The first two of these play an
    important role in deepening understanding of the nature of suffering
    in *saṁsāra*. While they are not necessary for those
    whose wisdom is keen, they are helpful.

[^272]: Empowered by the fourth *jhāna*, memory breaks
    through the veil of birth and death, revealing the vast expanse of
    time and dispelling the illusion that there is any place of eternal
    rest or sanctuary in the cycle of transmigration. The knowledge of
    these events is not hazy or murky, but clear and precise,
    illuminated by the brilliance of purified consciousness.

[^273]: The word for "past life" is *pubbanivāsa*,
    literally "former home", and the imagery of houses is found in the
    second of the three knowledges as well. Recollection of past lives
    is as fresh and clear as the memory of a recent journey.

[^274]: Here knowledge extends to the rebirths of others as well as
    oneself. Even more significant, it brings in the understanding of
    cause and effect; *why* rebirth happens the way it does. Such
    knowledge, however, is not infallible, as the Buddha warns in [DN
    1:2.5.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.5.3) and [MN
    136](https://suttacentral.net/mn136/en/sujato). The experience is
    one thing; the inferences drawn from it are another. One should draw
    conclusions only tentatively, after long experience. \|
    "Clairvoyance" renders *dibbacakkhu* ("celestial eye"), for which
    see Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.12.5, "the mind
    is (the self's) celestial eye" (*mano'sya daivaṁ
    cakṣuḥ*).

[^275]: This simile is also found at [DN
    10:2.33.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn10/en/sujato#2.33.1). The
    Majjhima employs a slightly different simile ([MN
    39:20.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn39/en/sujato#20.3), [MN
    77:35.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#35.2), [MN
    130:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn130/en/sujato#2.1)). \|
   *Pāsāda* is often translated as "palace" or "mansion",
    but in early Pali it meant a "stilt longhouse". As here, it is an
    elevated place from which one can observe the street below.

[^276]: This is the experience of awakening that is the true goal of the
    Buddhist path. The defilements---properties of the mind that create
    suffering---have been curbed by the practice of ethics and
    suppressed by the power of *jhāna*. Here they are
    eliminated forever.

[^277]: These are the four noble truths, which form the main content of
    the Buddha's first sermon. They are the overarching principle into
    which all other teachings fall. The initial realization of the four
    noble truths indicates the first stage of awakening, stream-entry.

[^278]: The application of the four noble truths to defilements
    indicates that this is the final stage of awakening, perfection (or
    "arahantship", *arahatta*). \| Many translators use "defilement" to
    render *kilesa*, but since *kilesa* appears only rarely in the early
    texts, I use "defilement" for *āsava*. Both terms refer
    to a stain, corruption, or pollution in the mind.

[^279]: *Bhavāsava* is the defilement that craves to
    continue life in a new birth.

[^280]: This is a reflective awareness of the fact of awakening. The
    meditator reviews their mind and sees that it is free from all
    forces that lead to suffering.

[^281]: This is a standard declaration of full awakening in the suttas,
    said both of the Buddha and of any arahant ("perfected one"). Each
    of the four phrases illustrates a cardinal principle of awakening.
    (1) Further transmigration through rebirths has come to an end due
    to the exhaustion (*khīṇa*) of that which propels
    rebirth, namely deeds motivated by craving. (2) The eightfold path
    has been developed fully in all respects. (3) All functions relating
    to the four noble truths have been completed, namely: understanding
    suffering, letting go craving, witnessing extinguishment, and
    developing the path. (4) Extinguishment is final, with no falling
    back to this or any other state of existence. \| For "state of
    existence" (literally "thusness", *itthatta*), see [DN
    15:21.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#21.4).

[^282]: Once again the pool of water represents the mind, but now the
    meditator is not immersed in the experience, but looks back and
    reviews it objectively.

[^283]: The Buddha roars his lion's roar. His teaching leads not just to
    some benefits, but to the highest benefits that are possible.

[^284]: The king's distress has been alleviated by the Buddha's
    uplifting words.

[^285]: This is the standard form in which lay people went for refuge.
    It is not something that the Buddha required, but a spontaneous act
    of inspiration. Conventionally, it indicates that someone is a
    "Buddhist". Today Theravadins recite the going for refuge thrice,
    but in the early texts this is found only as the ordination for
    novices ([Kd
    1:12.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#12.4.1)).

[^286]: The king, unprompted, makes an astonishing confession. To say it
    in such a public forum, before a spiritual community and his own
    retinue, displays courage and integrity.

[^287]: The Buddha hears his confession, but it is
    Ajātasattu's responsibility to do better.

[^288]: Even before such a dangerous and emotionally volatile king, the
    Buddha does not mince words. The Buddha makes a point to acknowledge
    what the king had done, without dismissing it and thereby
    discounting the inner work he had achieved to get to this point.

[^289]: Confession does not erase the past, but it does set a better
    course for the future. This confession is similar to that done by
    monastics when they have broken Vinaya rules.

[^290]: These terms are commonly used in the context of keeping precepts
    (eg. [AN 3.50:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.50/en/sujato#4.1)).
    The Buddha is supportive when he speaks with
    Ajātasattu, but does not hide the severity of his
    crime.

[^291]: The killing of one's father is one of five "incurable" acts that
    doom a person to hell in the next life ([AN
    5.129:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.129/en/sujato#1.3)). If he
    had not done so, he would have become a stream-enterer.