
[^292]: This sutta marks a turning point where the Buddha's teachings
    were embraced by the leading brahmin Pokkharasāti. The
    suttas that follow reverberate with the consequences of this
    encounter. He was one of the most influential brahmins of his time,
    although the Buddha elsewhere denied that he had any special
    knowledge ([MN
    99:15.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#15.5)). Brahmanical
    texts confirm that he was a real person, an influential teacher
    around the time of the Buddha known as Pauṣkarasādi in
    Sanskrit. He is cited on grammar by Kātyāyana and
    Patañjali, and in the
    Taittirīya-prātiśākhya; on allowable food
    and theft in the Āpastamba Dharmasūtra; and on Vedic ritual in the
    Śāṅkhāyana-Āraṇyaka. His name identifies
    him as descended from a man of Puṣkarāvati, capital of
    Gandhāra. [MN
    99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3) clarifies
    that he is of the Upamañña lineage.

[^293]: Icchānaṅgala was a center east of
    Sāvatthī for the innovative brahmins of the Kosala
    region.

[^294]: Ukkaṭṭhā is mentioned only rarely, and always in
    the context of extraordinary teachings and events that emphasize the
    cosmic grandeur of the Buddha against the brahmins ([DN
    14:3.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.29.1), [MN
    1:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn1/en/sujato#1.2), [MN
    49:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn49/en/sujato#2.1)). Sanskrit
    sources call it a *droṇamukha*, a leading market town
    accessible by land and water (Divyāvadāna 319.010). At
    [MN 99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3)
    Pokkharasāti is said to be "of the Subhaga Forest". \|
    "Royal park" is *rājadāya* (cp.
   *migadāya*, "deer park"). \| A *brahmadeyya* is a gift
    of land by a king to a brahmin, which was an outstanding feature of
    Indian feudalism.

[^295]: Contrast with his rejection of this possibility at [MN
    99:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.7).

[^296]: Pokkharasāti does not care whether the Buddha
    identified as a follower of the Vedas. The wise do not concern
    themselves with religious identity.

[^297]: "Vocabularies" is *nighaṇḍu* (Sanskrit
   *nighaṇṭu*), known from the Nirukta of
    Yāska. \| *Keṭubha* lacks an obvious
    Sanskrit form. The commentary explains, "The study of proper and
    improper actions for the assistance of poets." This suggests a
    connection with ritual performance, which is the special area of the
    Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa. There we often find phrases such as
   *kṛtam bhavati*, "it is performed", of which
   *keṭubha* is perhaps a contraction. \| *Akkhara*
    (literally "syllable") is explained by the commentary as
   *sikkhā* (Sanskrit *śikṣā*), which is the
    study of pronunciation. This can be traced back to
    Pāṇinī, and is sometimes referred to as
   *akṣara-samāmnāya*, "collation of
    syllables". \| *Pabheda* is found in Buddhist Sanskrit texts as
   *padaprabheda*, "classification of words", such as into the
    different parts of speech. The commentary identifies it with
   *nirutti*. \| *Padaka* is one skilled in the
   *padapāṭha* recitation of Vedas, which separates the
    individual words. \| For "testaments" (*itihāsa*) see
   *itihāsa-purāṇa* in Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 11.5.6.8, explained by the commentator there
    as legends of creation and olden times. \| For "cosmology"
    (*lokāyata*), see note on [DN
    1:1.25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.25.2). \| For
    "authorized as a master" (*anuññātapaṭiññāta*) see [MN
    98:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#7.1) and [Snp
    3.9:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#6.1). \| For
    "scriptural heritage of the three Vedas" (*tevijjake
    pāvacane*) see [MN
    95:12.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#12.2).

[^298]: Almost the same words are spoken to the bodhisatta by his first
    teachers, Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka
    Rāmaputta ([MN
    36:14.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn36/en/sujato#14.9)). This
    connects Pokkharasāti with Āḷāra
    Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta, and suggests
    that the anointing of a talented student in this way was a regular
    practice of wise brahmins.

[^299]: Following PTS and BJT editions of the parallel phrase at [MN
    91:4.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#4.9), which read
   *tayā* for *tathā*.

[^300]: The thirty-two marks are detailed in [DN
    14:1.32.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.32.7), [DN
    30:1.2.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#1.2.4), and [MN
    91:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#9.1). In Buddhist
    texts they are presented as the fulfillment of Brahmanical prophecy,
    but they are not found in any Brahmanical texts of the Buddha's
    time. However, later astrological texts such as the
    Gārgīyajyotiṣa (1st century BCE?) and
    Bṛhatsaṁhitā (6th century CE?) contain references to
    many of these marks, albeit in a different context, so it seems
    likely the Buddhist texts are drawing on now-lost Brahmanical
    scriptures. \| The notion of a two-fold course for a great
    hero---worldly success or spiritual---can be traced back as far as
    the epic of Gilgamesh.

[^301]: The idea of the wheel-turning monarch draws from the Vedic horse
    sacrifice, which establishes the authority of a king from sea to
    sea. The Buddhist telling is divested of all coarse and violent
    elements. The wheeled chariot gave military supremacy to the ancient
    Indo-Europeans, allowing them to spread from their ancient homeland
    north of the Black Sea. In Buddhism, the wheel, which also has solar
    connotations, symbolizes unstoppable power. For a legendary account
    of such a king, see the Mahāsudassanasutta ([DN
    17](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato)).

[^302]: The sacrificial horse on its journey across the land is
    protected by a hundred sons.

[^303]: The relation between Pokkharasāti and
    Ambaṭṭha is similar to that between the Buddha and his
    followers. They share the same understanding, but the Buddha is
    distinguished as the teacher.

[^304]: In this sutta, *māṇava* is always applied to
    Ambaṭṭha and *māṇavaka* to the rest. It
    seems that the diminutive *māṇavaka* means "young
    student". \| There are said to be *sambahula* students, a word that
    is often translated as "many". But later we see that they all fit
    inside the Buddha's hut, so the sense must be "several".

[^305]: This is the practice of walking meditation. Meditators pace
    mindfully up and down a smooth path, keeping attention on their
    body.

[^306]: *Bho* is a respectful term of address used by brahmins. The
    forms of address used in Pali are complex, and it is rarely possible
    to map them to modern English with any precision.

[^307]: The parallel passage at [MN
    35:7.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#7.4) has a different
    phrase here.

[^308]: The term *kulaputta* (literally, "son of a family") typically
    refers to someone from a well-to-do or respected family, a
    "gentleman". It is a gendered term which assumes the social status
    of men.

[^309]: The introduction has told us that the Buddha was staying in a
    forest at this time. Nonetheless, this was not a wilderness, but was
    developed enough to have huts with latched doors.

[^310]: The Buddha draws attention to Ambaṭṭha's rude
    behavior. Throughout the suttas, the manner in which people greet
    the Buddha gives us a hint as to their attitudes and qualities.

[^311]: Note the racial connotations of using *kaṇha*
    ("black") as a slur. The brahmin caste hailed from the (relatively)
    fair-skinned Indo-Europeans who entered India from the north. Vedic
    texts indicate that there was Brahmanical prejudice against
    dark-skinned natives, but also that they were assimilated and raised
    to positions of honor.

[^312]: Ambaṭṭha is "qualified" (*vusita*) in scripture,
    but far from "qualified" in spiritual development. *Vusita* is
    normally an expression of arahantship: *vusitaṁ
    brahmacariyaṁ* ("the spiritual journey has been
    completed").

[^313]: The PTS reading *rabhasa* means "violent, aggressive". But the
    commentary reads *bhassa*, explained as "speaking much". Moreover,
    the story below does not demonstrate violence.

[^314]: Ambaṭṭha despises the Sakyans as "primitives"
    (*ibbha*) who do not respect Vedic culture. The word *ibbha*
    ("primitive") stems from a non-Aryan word for "elephant" (*ibha*).
    It originally referred to the native inhabitants who tamed
    elephants; see eg. Chāndogya Upaniṣad
    1.10. At [Snp
    3.1:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.1/en/sujato#18.4) the Buddha
    describes his own people as "natives" (*niketino*), those who have a
    long connection with the land.

[^315]: The Buddha's use of *āyasmā* is noteworthy here: he
    is taking a conciliatory tone.

[^316]: The Ambaṭṭhas were a people in the north-west of
    greater India (eg. Mahābhārata 7.4.5c, 7.132.23a). They
    were evidently the Abastanians whose rout at the hands of Alexander
    is recorded by Arrian (*The Anabasis of Alexander*, chapter 15).
    They were probably located near what is today the northern Sindh
    province in Pakistan. Later texts such as Manusmṛti 1.8
    say that an *ambaṣṭha* is born of a brahmin father and
   *vaiśya* mother.

[^317]: *Kaṇhāyana* means "descendant of the dark one
    (*kaṇha*)". Since no clan of that name is attested it
    is perhaps a confusion with the Kāṇvāyanas of Rig Veda
    8.55.4. But the confusion, if it is such, has an old history, for
    Rig Veda 1.117.8 refers to "Dark Kaṇva"
    (*Śyāva Kaṇva*).

[^318]: Normally I take *ayyaputta* as a simple honorific, but here the
    sense is not that the Sakyans were the masters, but were descended
    from them.

[^319]: Okkāka (Sanskrit Ikṣvāku) was the
    legendary son of the first man, Manu, and the founder of the solar
    dynasty of Kosala. It is a Munda name, which may be associated with
    the introduction of cane sugar (*ikṣuḥ*) from eastern
    Asia, a theory endorsed by the 9th century Jain scholar Jinasena
    (Natubhai Shah, *Jainism, the World of Conquerors*, 2004, vol. 1,
    pg. 15).

[^320]: The words for "teak" (*sāka*) and "sal"
    (*sāla*) have evidently been confused from the Munda
    root *sarja* (both appear at [MN
    93:11.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn93/en/sujato#11.6)). But teak
    does not grow so far north, so the sal must be meant here. To
    maintain the pun I use *sakhua*, which is an alternate Hindi name
    for the sal tree. This story suggests that when they settled in
    their northern home in the shadow of the Himalayas, harvesting sal
    was a primary source of wealth. Compare Gilgamesh, for whom Lebanese
    cedar was the foundation of his royal capital.

[^321]: "Own" is *saka*, the second pun on the Sakyan name. Incest is,
    of course, common among royal families for exactly the reason stated
    here. Marriage between cousins persisted even in the Buddha's day.
    \| For *sambheda* in the sense of "dissolving, leaking", see [AN
    2.9:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an2.9/en/sujato#1.5) = [DN
    26:20.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#20.2), [AN
    5.103:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an5.103/en/sujato#6.4), [AN
    10.45:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.45/en/sujato#4.1).

[^322]: For this sense of *sammati*, see [SN
    11.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.9/en/sujato), [SN
    11.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.10/en/sujato).

[^323]: This draws on both the puns above. But the commentary also
    explains *sakya* here as "capable" (*samatthā*,
   *paṭibalā*) in reference to their survival against all
    odds, thus connecting Sakya with *sakka* ("able").

[^324]: Vedic *dāsa* ("slave, bondservant") refers to the
    "dark-wombed" (*kṛṣṇayoni*, Rig Veda 2.20.7) foes of
    the Aryan peoples (Rig Veda 10.22.8) who upon defeat were enslaved
    (Rig Veda 10.62.10). The name *disā* therefore probably
    means "foe" (Sanskrit *dviṣa*).

[^325]: The passage wavers between treating *kaṇha*
    (Sanskrit *kṛṣṇa*, i.e. Krishna) as a personal name, a
    description, and a word for a goblin. I try to capture this
    ambiguity by using variations of "black boy". \| The passage does
    not say who the father was. According to Arthaśāstra
    3.13, a female slave is protected against sexual harassment by the
    master, but should she have a child by him, both mother and child
    are to be set free, and if the sex was not consensual, he must pay
    her a fine.

[^326]: Like Siddhattha, he spoke as soon as he was born. The boy was no
    common child, but had a larger destiny. His words are a dramatic
    contrast with Siddhattha's words of confident proclamation, and his
    birth which was devoid of filth or impurity.

[^327]: Lineage was important to brahmins, but the Brāhmaṇa
    and Upaniṣad literature shows that, as here, many were
    more concerned with conduct and wisdom than with birth.

[^328]: The threat of losing one's head is found at eg.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.3.24, or at
    3.9.26 when it actually did fall off. I cannot trace the detail of
    heads being split in seven to any early Sanskrit texts, but it is
    found in later texts such as Rāmāyaṇa 7.26.44c and
    Mahābhārata 14.7.2c.

[^329]: Vajirapāṇī ("lightning-bolt in hand") appears here
    and in the parallel passage at [MN
    35:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#14.1). The
    synonymous Vajrahasta (Pali *vajirahattha*, [DN
    20:12.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#12.1)) is a
    frequent epithet of Indra in the Vedas (eg. Rig Veda 1.173.10a:
   *indro vajrahastaḥ*), confirming the commentary's identification
    with Sakka. Much later, Mahayana texts adopted the name for a fierce
    Bodhisattva who was protector of the Dhamma.

[^330]: The contemptuous senses of "black boy" represent the
    conservative brahmanical view, presented not as endorsement, but as
    a rhetorical means to undermine Ambaṭṭha's pride. The
    Buddha now shows how a man of a supposedly low birth rose to great
    spiritual eminence.

[^331]: "Divine Spell" is *brahmamanta*, a term of unique occurrence in
    Pali. In modern Hinduism it is used for a verse of praise for
    Brahmā, but that is not what is meant here.
    Kaṇha is one of several "dark hermits" who accrued
    mighty and lineage-busting powers in the south.

[^332]: The Hindu deity Krishna won the hand of his seventh wife
    Lakṣmaṇā, also known as Madrī, at an
    archery contest. This detail is too precise to be a coincidence, and
    proves there must be some shared basis between the two figures.

[^333]: This draws on the ancient belief that the king's acts affect the
    natural order of things.

[^334]: This sequence seems to be an etiological myth explaining certain
    rites of kingship and succession, providing an origin story for this
    prayer.

[^335]: National prosperity is ensured through symbolic regicide. This
    example was omitted from Frazer's accounts of such substitute
    sacrifices. Here there is a double substitution: the prince
    substitutes for the king, then a threat substitutes for the act of
    killing. This suggests that, even from the legendary perspective of
    this story within a story, the rite was an ancient one that had
    evolved through multiple stages.

[^336]: The use of the bare personal name for the king is unusual.

[^337]: "Divine punishment" is *brahmadaṇḍa*, harking back
    to the Divine Spell (*brahmamantra*). The Buddha had his own version
    of the *brahmadaṇḍa*, which was to give the silent
    treatment ([DN
    16:6.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.4.1)).

[^338]: In [MN 56:19.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#19.2)
   *āvaṭa*/*anāvaṭa* is used in reference to
    Upāli "shutting his gate" against the Jains and opening
    it for the Buddhists. In [DN
    17:1.23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.23.2)
   *anāvaṭa* means "open to the public".

[^339]: Sanaṅkumāra ("Everyoung") became a Hindu deity
    closely associated with the worship of Krishna. He first appears in
    the seventh chapter of the Chāndogya
    Upaniṣad. There he teaches the learned
    Nārada what lies beyond the mere surface of words
    (*nāma*) by giving a progressive meditation that
    ultimately reveals the highest Self. Thus he is a perfect foil for
    Ambaṭṭha. The occasion he spoke this verse is recorded
    at [SN 6.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.11/en/sujato), and it is
    repeated several times in the suttas.

[^340]: To his credit, after that thorough humiliation,
    Ambaṭṭha is ready to learn.

[^341]: Reading *anuttarāya
    vijjācaraṇasampadāya* as locative, in agreement with
   *yattha* below.

[^342]: The Buddha emphasizes that his "knowledge and conduct" rejects
    the notion of birth that is so essential to Brahmanism.

[^343]: The Pali text abbreviates the gradual training in this sutta and
    those that follow. The reader is expected to understand it as in [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato). Note, however, that the
    suttas sometimes have small differences in their perspective that
    make reconstruction tricky.

[^344]: In later Theravada, *apāyamukha* refers to deeds
    that cause rebirth in lower realms. However this does not apply in
    the early texts; the acts described here are not evil. Rather, it
    means an "opening" (*mukha*) for "departure" (*apāya*).

[^345]: A common practice of pre-Buddhist hermits, who avoided the
    slightest harm to plants. Buddhist mendicants may also not harm
    plants, but they rely on alms and only eat fallen fruit in case of
    famine.

[^346]: The Buddha inverts Ambaṭṭha's earlier claim that
    the other three castes only succeed in serving brahmins ([DN
    3:1.14.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.14.7)).

[^347]: They are less strict than the previous ascetics, for they dig
    the soil and harm the plants.

[^348]: "Tradition" renders *sācariyaka*, "that which stems
    from one's own teacher".

[^349]: This practice is not elsewhere attested in early Pali.

[^350]: *Ugga* is a rare word whose root sense is "mighty", but here it
    must be a noun. Given that it is a military man who consults with
    the king, I translate as "warrior-chief". \| *Rājañña*
    is used occasionally in the suttas; it is an archaic synonym for
   *khattiya*.

[^351]: Taking this and the next as one sentence, despite the
    punctuation of the Mahāsaṅgīti text.

[^352]: The "hymns" (*mantā*) are the verses of the Rig
    Veda. The ten names here all correspond with Vedic authors according
    to the Brahmanical tradition (for details, see note on [DN
    13:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#13.1)). Note that
    in Sanskrit the names of the rishis are distinguished from the
    lineage holders, which take the patronymic. For example,
    Bharadvāja is the rishi, the Bhāradvājas
    are his descendants; Vasiṣṭha is the rishi, the
    Vāsiṣṭhas are his descendants. Pali texts do not make
    this distinction, but use the patronymic, although the two forms are
    not always readily distinguishable. \| "Seer" is *isi* (Sanskrit
   *ṛṣi*). It is of uncertain etymology, but was taken to
    mean that they had "seen" the Vedas (*mantradraṣṭa*) or
    directly "heard" them from Brahmā through divine
    inspiration, rather than "composing" them like ordinary authors.
    Here, however, the Buddha says they were "authors"
    (*kattāro*). The Buddha adopted *isi* in the sense
    "enlightened sage".

[^353]: *Veṭhakanatapassāhi* is otherwise unattested. At
    [MN 55:12.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn55/en/sujato#12.4)
   *veṭhaka* evidently means "collar". In the
    Lokuttaravāda Bhikṣuṇī Vinaya, the brazen
    nun Thullānandā gets out of the water and wraps herself
    in a *veṭhaka*, which here seems synonymous with
   *paṭṭaka*, a strip of cloth. It is allowable if used to
    tie a basket ([Lo Bi Pn 3](https://suttacentral.net/san-lo-bi-pn3)).
   *Nata* is "curve", *passa* is "side, flank". Walshe has "flounces
    and furbelows", Rhys Davids has "fringes and furbelows round their
    loins". These are prissy descriptions of what is evidently stripper
    gear.

[^354]: The Buddha calls back to earlier in the sutta, where
    Ambaṭṭha drove a mare-drawn chariot ([DN
    3:1.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.6.1)). \| The
    verbs here (*vitudenti vitacchenti*) are elsewhere applied to the
    pecking and slashing of vultures, crows, or hawks ([SN
    19.1:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn19.1/en/sujato#3.2), [MN
    54:16.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn54/en/sujato#16.2), etc.). The
    Buddha was disgusted with this maltreatment of the mares.

[^355]: Remembering that Pokkharasāti lived in a wealthy
    property that was a royal endowment. Just as today, excessive wealth
    breeds insecurity.

[^356]: The Buddha has been hard on Ambaṭṭha, but he is not
    unfair. He invites the same level of scrutiny for himself.

[^357]: This transition occurs nowhere else.

[^358]: Finally he remembers what his teacher Pokkharasāti
    told him in [DN
    3:1.5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.5.2): he will know
    the Buddha by his marks.

[^359]: This exceedingly strange "miracle" is also found at [MN
    91:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#7.1), [MN
    92:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn92/en/sujato#14.1), and [Snp
    3.7:11.5](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.7/en/sujato#11.5).

[^360]: The diminutive ending for *paṇḍitaka* is the same
    as in *samaṇaka*, which Ambaṭṭha used of
    the Buddha. \| For *re* ("bloody"), compare *cara pi re* at [Bu Pc
    70:1.35](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc70/en/sujato#1.35)
    and *he je kāḷī* at [MN
    21:9.13](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#9.13). Hard as the
    Buddha was on Ambaṭṭha, his own teacher was harder.

[^361]: Pokkharasāti shows his astuteness, for in many
    other dialogues the Buddha engaged with brahmins perfectly politely,
    as he does in the next sutta ([DN
    4](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato)).

[^362]: Illustrating the lack of restraint of even a senior brahmin
    teacher.

[^363]: Given Pokkharasāti's mood, this was probably a
    diplomatic move.

[^364]: *Khādanīya* and *bhojanīya* are food
    categories commonly mentioned in Pali. Etymologically they stem from
    "hard and soft". *Bhojanīya* is defined in [Bu Pc
    37:2.1.10](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc37/en/sujato#2.1.10)
    as grain, porridge, flour products, fish, and meat, thus being foods
    that are typically eaten cooked and "mooshed up" in with the fingers
    in the bowl. *Khādanīya* is not so readily defined,
    being essentially everything not included in other categories. But
    it would have included such "crunchy" things as fruit and
    vegetables, which may be eaten uncooked.

[^365]: Pokkharasāti makes sure he hears both sides of the
    story.

[^366]: So far has Ambaṭṭha fallen from the learned sage we
    were introduced to at the start of the sutta.

[^367]: The Buddha bears no ill will. *Sukhī hotu* is one
    of the most recognizable Pali phrases, but in early texts it is
    spoken only a few times: by the Buddha at [DN
    21:1.8.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.8.8) and [Snp
    5.1:54.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp5.1/en/sujato#54.1); by
    Punabbasu's Mother at [SN
    10.7:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.7/en/sujato#10.1); and by
    various women at [Bu Ss
    5:1.4.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss5/en/sujato#1.4.8).

[^368]: "Robed up" because inside the monastery, monks would normally
    wear just a lower robe, and would don the upper and (sometimes)
    outer robes when visiting a layperson's home.

[^369]: While all these teachings feature commonly in the suttas, there
    is no text that depicts this framework in detail.

[^370]: This is the briefest expression of the four noble truths.

[^371]: This indicates that he became a stream-enterer
    (*sotāpanna*), the first of four stages of Awakening.
    Such details of personal attainment are typically found in the
    narrative rather than the teaching attributed to the Buddha, and
    hence were added by redactors at some point. They vary considerably
    in different versions. In this case, the parallel at DA 20 says that
    he became a stream-enterer and later a non-returner. T 20 said that
    he understood the teaching and went for refuge, and agrees that he
    became a non-returner before his death.

[^372]: This is the insight into universal impermanence and dependent
    origination.

[^373]: When wandering for alms, mendicants would often roam randomly
    through the village (*sapadānacārī*). However if an
    invitation such as this were issued, the mendicant may visit that
    place for a meal. It was considered a special ascetic practice to
    refuse such invitations. The same invitation was issued by Lohicca
    to Mahākaccāna at [SN
    35.132:14.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.132/en/sujato#14.7).

[^374]: *Māṇavikā* is also mentioned at [MN
    56:27.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#27.1) and [Ud
    2.6:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/ud2.6/en/sujato#1.3) of a young
    married woman; and at [AN
    5.192:8.5](https://suttacentral.net/an5.192/en/sujato#8.5) of a baby
    being born. Thus it does not seem that it meant "female student of
    the Vedas".

[^375]: *Kalyāṇaṁ vuccati* is a politely ambiguous phrase.
    It is spoken twice elsewhere in the Pali, and both times the
    mendicant who said it immediately departed and never returned ([SN
    41.3:7.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.3/en/sujato#7.13), [SN
    41.4:6.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.4/en/sujato#6.7)).