
[^376]: This sutta shows how the conversion of Pokkharasāti
    in [DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato) affected the
    brahmins as far away as Campā.

[^377]: Campā is modern Champapuri near Bhagalpur in Bihar
    state, not far from West Bengal. It is near the eastern-most reach
    of the Buddha's journeys. Campā was the capital of
    Aṅga, one of the sixteen "great nations"
    (*mahājanapadā*). It was a flourishing trade center at
    which Northern Black Polished Ware has been found, and became a
    sacred city for the Jains.

[^378]: *Gaggarā*, an onomatopoeic reduplication
    ("gargle"), is the name of a number of rivers and whirlpools in
    Sanskrit (cp. the modern Ghaggar River in north-west India).

[^379]: Here we see how the endowment of *brahmadeyya* helped the king
    of Magadha establish his influence over the Aṅgas.

[^380]: "Householders" (*gahapati*) is literal; it means land owners.
    Thus the "brahmins and householders" (not "brahmin householders")
    were the wealthy class.

[^381]: Both the repetition below and the parallel at [MN
    95:8.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#8.3) include the
    phrase "it's appropriate that he comes to see you". It may have been
    omitted here by mistake.

[^382]: *Jātivāda* is sometimes translated as "doctrine of
    birth", but the context here shows this cannot be the case. It
    refers to the genealogical records of the family lineage.

[^383]: For Mahāsaṅgīti *vacchasī* read
   *vaccasī* (Sanskrit *varcasin*), "possessing splendor".

[^384]: Notice that the royal endowment was not just for a luxury
    residence, it was the site of a major international college. Kings
    invested in education.

[^385]: Later tradition says that the young Siddhattha sneaked out of
    his home to avoid creating such a scene, but the early texts say he
    left despite his parents' weeping.

[^386]: In contrast with some of the other ascetics in [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato).

[^387]: This description is applied to the Buddha at [DN
    5:7.24](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#7.24), and to the
    corrupt but superficially charming monks Assaji and Punabbasuka at
    [Bu Ss
    13:1.3.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss13/en/sujato#1.3.4).

[^388]: This would be the assemblies of aristocrats, brahmins,
    householders, and ascetics ([AN
    5.213:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an5.213/en/sujato#3.1)), rather
    than the Buddha's four assemblies of monks, nuns, laymen, and
    laywomen ([AN 4.129](https://suttacentral.net/an4.129/en/sujato)).

[^389]: *Titthakara*, literally "ford-maker", is a term restricted to
    those such as the Buddha who founded a religion, or
    Mahāvīra who was a major reformer on the same level as
    a founder.

[^390]: Bimbisāra's refuge is at [Kd
    1:22.11.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#22.11.4).

[^391]: Pasenadi's refuge is at [SN
    3.1:14.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.1/en/sujato#14.5).

[^392]: This sutta must have been before the events of [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), but after those of [DN
    3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato).

[^393]: "Knapsack" is *puṭosa*, where *puṭa*
    is "bag" and *osa* is "food" (Sanskrit *avasa*). The compound is a
    dative-dependent *tappurisa* with reversal of the usual order,
    yielding the sense "bag for food".

[^394]: Even before he meets him, Soṇadaṇḍa has extensive
    knowledge of the Buddha and faith in him. It's also notable how
    Soṇadaṇḍa gives Pokkharasāti a special
    status. Perhaps Pokkharasāti told
    Soṇadaṇḍa of the encounter with Ambaṭṭha
    in [DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato), which would
    explain his hesitation. \| Note the use of the term *yoniso* here,
    which I render "rational". The basic meaning of the term is "womb,
    source", and it is used to mean "with reason", which here has the
    sense "pertinent, relevant".

[^395]: For all his previous avowal of faith, Soṇadaṇḍa is
    merely polite, not reverential. This foreshadows the ending.

[^396]: The Buddha goes out of his way to make him comfortable.
    Soṇadaṇḍa is nervous and overly eager to please, but he
    is not contemptuous and grinding a personal ax like
    Ambaṭṭha.

[^397]: *Suja* (Sanskrit *sruc*) was a large wooden ladle for pouring
    ghee on to the sacred flame.

[^398]: The Buddha uses "Socratic method". He has the other person
    articulate a view, then leads them to refine their view, leading to
    a clearer vision of the truth.

[^399]: When the Buddha convinces Soṇadaṇḍa, he does not
    crow over it or take pleasure in his discomfort, but praises his
    wisdom and affirms his conclusions.

[^400]: The Buddha has taken pains to establish common ground, but
    Soṇadaṇḍa's description of wisdom is lacking, so the
    Buddha prompts a deeper inquiry.

[^401]: Normally, the Buddha frames his teaching as ethics, meditation,
    and wisdom, but here he adapts to Soṇadaṇḍa's framing
    and places meditation under wisdom.

[^402]: Soṇadaṇḍa's attachment to his reputation betrays
    his lack of inner confidence and stands in contrast with
    Pokkharasāti. Perhaps it may also be read as a regional
    characteristic, since Buddhism was less well established in the
    Aṅga region than in central Magadha.