[^403]: When asked about sacrifice, the Buddha tells a story of how a
    king was persuaded to forgo cruelty and institute a constructive
    social policy of welfare instead.

[^404]: Khāṇumata is only mentioned here. It means
    "stumpy", perhaps indicating that it was, or had recently been, a
    rough out-of-the-way place.

[^405]: The commentary says this was similar to the
    Ambalaṭṭhikā of [DN
    1:1.2.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#1.2.1).

[^406]: Like the town Khāṇumata, the brahmin
    Kūṭadanta appears only here. His name means "pointy
    teeth", but there is no evidence that he was a vampire.

[^407]: At [Snp
    2.7:26.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.7/en/sujato#26.1), the
    sacrifice of cows in particular was said to be the nadir of decline
    for brahmins. When similar sacrifices are described elsewhere in the
    canon, the number is five hundred rather than seven hundred ([SN
    3.9:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn3.9/en/sujato#1.2), [AN
    7.47:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an7.47/en/sujato#1.2)).

[^408]: News of the Buddha had spread in Brahmanical circles. In [DN
    3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato) we saw the Buddha use his
    rhetorical technique of adapting his teaching to reframe Brahmanical
    doctrines in order to establish a common ground. Here we see the
    downside to such techniques, as the details of the reframing have
    been lost.

[^409]: No such sacrifice has been identified in Brahmanical texts.

[^410]: Kūṭadanta's proposal that the Buddha advise him on
    the sacrifice of 700 animals is outrageous. Nonetheless, the Buddha
    responds politely since Kūṭadanta is being polite.
    While it is tempting to see the sacrifice of animals by supposedly
    virtuous priests as sheer hypocrisy, the fact of sacrifice remains
    one of the most widespread and mysterious of human religious
    practices. In an empathetic work that addresses this squarely,
    Roberto Calasso's *Ardor* sees the vast complex of Vedic ritual and
    theory as making plain the fact of killing so that the guilt may be
    contained, in contrast with our modern culture of killing on an
    industrial scale while hiding it out of sight.

[^411]: Mahāvijita means "Great Dominion". He seems to be
    only known from this story. The idiom *bhūtapubbaṁ*
    (literally "so it was in the past") introduces legendary narratives
    of usually dubious historicity, like the English idiom "once upon a
    time".

[^412]: In the Pali, meaningful thoughts often occur to people when
    withdrawn in seclusion. This doesn't necessary mean they were in
    formal meditation.

[^413]: The great sacrifices, especially the horse sacrifice, ensured
    royal authority. Their very scale and wastefulness showed off the
    wealth of the king.

[^414]: "High priest" is *purohita*. He was a family chaplain advising
    and consecrating the royal family. The closeness of the relationship
    is shown by the fact that the royal family would take the lineage
    name of the *purohita*.

[^415]: Then, as today, government policy was driven by the perception
    of rising crime rate. This whole passage is one of the Buddha's most
    important statements on public policy. It is expressed through
    storytelling, giving a good example of how myths were invoked---and
    subverted---as rationales for current policy.

[^416]: "Taxes" is *bali*. He would have had to press his people for the
    extra funds to hold the sacrifice.

[^417]: "Plague of savages" (*dassukhīla*) is the only
    occurrence of Sanskrit *dasyu* in early Pali. The *dasyu* were
    inveterate foes of the Aryans in the Vedic period. Bereft of
    civilizing rites, scriptures, and observances, they were no children
    of Manu (Rig Veda 10.22.8). Their wiles (*māyā*) made
    them a potent threat (Rig Veda 4.16.9, 8.14.14, 10.73.5). Indra was
    invoked to ensure their destruction (Rig Veda *passim*; Atharva Veda
    2.14.5, 4.32.3, 20.21.4, 20.37.5, 20.42.2). Legend has it that Agni
    and Soma first supported the *dasyu* before being won over by Indra
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 1.6.3.13; see also 6.4.2.4). By the
    time of the Buddha the *dasyu* have vanished except as a legendary
    foe of the past. Where the Brahmanical texts advocate the pitiless
    destruction of the *dasyu*, the brahmin high priest in the Buddhist
    text advocates an inclusive policy of social welfare.

[^418]: The priest knows that the king will respond better to a
    pragmatic argument than a moral one.

[^419]: Effective social policy requires a forward-thinking plan, not
    just reacting to grievances.

[^420]: The king should spend his own resources to support his citizens
    in the various occupations.

[^421]: Here the priest identifies a fundamental cause of social unrest
    and disorder.

[^422]: The king spends out of pocket, but the economy flourishes, so
    tax revenues increase even though he has not raised taxes. This is
    the essence of Keynesian economic theory.

[^423]: *Khema* means a place of safety and sanctuary, where both humans
    and animals have no fear.

[^424]: A good leader listens to advice.

[^425]: Here the phrase "of both town and country" qualifies each group.
    At [AN 4.70:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an4.70/en/sujato#1.3),
    however, "brahmins and householders" and "people of town and
    country" are separate groups of people. Elsewhere the context does
    not always decide between these two possibilities. Generally the
    idiom aims at inclusivity, as opposed to here where the king is
    consulting the rich and powerful, so I treat them as two separate
    groups, thus including the common folk.

[^426]: "Consenting factions" is *anumatipakkhā*. The king
    governs with the consent of his people, although only the landowning
    classes are considered.

[^427]: Royal authority is not based just on birth, conquest, ritual, or
    power, but on quality of character.

[^428]: Read *sahati* ("prevails") over the several variants.

[^429]: Showing the importance of comprehension over blind adherence to
    tradition.

[^430]: Meditators focus on the present, but that does not mean they
    cannot think about the past or future; it just means they are not
    trapped in useless thoughts.

[^431]: These are four of the five qualities that Soṇadaṇḍa
    identifies as the qualities of a brahmin at [DN
    4:13.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn4/en/sujato#13.2). Missing is
    appearance, which is the first factor that Soṇadaṇḍa
    admits is unnecessary.

[^432]: Compare the three factors of a donor's mind-state at [AN
    6.37:2.4](https://suttacentral.net/an6.37/en/sujato#2.4).

[^433]: What a recipient does with a gift is beyond the donor's control.

[^434]: PTS edition acknowledges *sajjata* only as a variant reading,
    but it is in the commentary, so should be accepted in the text. It
    is from √*sajj* (relinquish).

[^435]: Another lesson in leadership: the importance of communication.

[^436]: Due to abbreviation, the text only mentions householders here,
    but clearly all are intended.

[^437]: A leader gets results through inspiration, not fear.

[^438]: These were regarded as valuable yet harmless products.

[^439]: The king's generosity and sincerity brings out the best in the
    others.

[^440]: Here ends the Buddha's legendary account of the past.

[^441]: The other brahmins are satisfied, but Kūṭadanta
    senses there is more to it.

[^442]: "So I have heard" (*evaṁ me sutaṁ*) is
    the standard opening for Buddhist suttas. This tag was used to
    indicate that the speaker was not present at the events, but "heard"
    about them. This is in contrast with the phrase "I heard and learned
    this in the presence" (*sammukhā sutaṁ,
    sammukhā paṭiggahitaṁ*), which is used
    when reporting a teaching heard directly from the Buddha, eg. [SN
    55.52:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn55.52/en/sujato#5.1), [SN
    22.90:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.90/en/sujato#9.1), [MN
    47:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn47/en/sujato#10.7), etc.

[^443]: This qualifies the story of Mahāvijita as an early
    canonical Jātaka. There are a small number of such
    stories in the early suttas, only some of which overlap with the
    later Jātaka collections, the story of
    Mahāvijita not being among them.

[^444]: Kūṭadanta is hoping for a better return on his
    investment. Throughout the suttas, we find a strain of what might be
    called "spiritual economics".

[^445]: Mentioned in a similar context at [AN
    4.40:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.40/en/sujato#2.2).

[^446]: This contradicts the description given above.

[^447]: This means that the dwelling could be used by any
    Saṅgha member, as opposed to being given to a
    particular monastic or group. The gift of a dwelling is regarded as
    the best kind of offering to the Saṅgha.

[^448]: Thus far the Buddha has described the regular practice of a
    Buddhist lay person.

[^449]: The entire path may be described as a "sacrifice".

[^450]: Releasing animals remains a Buddhist practice today.