[^451]: Lying some 60 kilometers north of Pāṭaliputra
    (Patna), Vesālī was the largest city in the Vajji
    Federation, a republican league in the region north of the Ganges.

[^452]: In the earlier suttas of this chapter, we have seen how news of
    the Buddha spread, evidently following Pokkharasāti's
    conversion. Here we see an example of the kind of meeting at which
    such news would be discussed. \| The phrase "brahmin emissaries"
    (*brāhmaṇadūtā*) does not seem to occur elsewhere and
    is not explained in the commentary. Perhaps they were emissaries of
    the kings, meeting in a neutral location. Or perhaps they were
    emissaries of their respective communities of brahmins.

[^453]: This monastery features prominently as the Buddha's usual place
    of residence near Vesālī.

[^454]: At some times the Buddha would go on retreat and ask that no-one
    visit him except to bring food; this sometimes happened at the Great
    Wood ([SN 54.9:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn54.9/en/sujato#2.1)).
    He also had the habit of withdrawing into the wood itself for
    meditation ([AN
    5.58:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.58/en/sujato#1.3)). At this
    time, however, he was simply staying in a nearby hut, so it seems
    Nāgita is being over-zealous.

[^455]: Oṭṭhaddha mean "hare-lip" and is evidently a
    nickname or epithet. Throughout, the Buddha refers to him by his
    personal name, Mahāli. And it is under that name we
    meet him again in [SN
    11.13](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.13/en/sujato) and [SN
    22.60](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.60/en/sujato). \| The
    Licchavis, whose name is derived from "bear", dominated the Vajji
    Federation. Note that the Mahāsaṅgīti edition here
    spells the masculine singular as *licchavī*, whereas
    normally it is *licchavi*.

[^456]: This Sīha is unknown elsewhere.

[^457]: Kassapa is Nāgita's clan name; either he was a
    brahmin or a *khattiya* whose family chaplain (*purohita*) was a
    Kassapa.

[^458]: In trying to protect the Buddha, Nāgita was
    inflexible and lacking compassion. When given good advice by
    Sīha, he responded gracelessly, fobbing off
    responsibility to a junior. No wonder he was replaced by Ānanda.

[^459]: This is still a common place for forest monks to receive guests.

[^460]: This is the last we hear of these emissaries.

[^461]: Sunakkhatta features in several suttas, through which his
    journey may be traced. In [MN
    105](https://suttacentral.net/mn105/en/sujato) he meets the Buddha
    and gains faith; here in [DN
    6](https://suttacentral.net/dn6/en/sujato) he is becoming
    dissatisfied; in [DN 24](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato) he
    rejects the Buddha; and in [MN
    12](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato) he attacks the Buddha
    after disrobing.

[^462]: This refers to "clairvoyance" and "clairaudience", sometimes
    translated as the "divine eye" and "divine ear". Despite being
    included in the Gradual Training, they are not a goal of Buddhist
    practice. Rather, they are unnecessary but potentially useful, as
    they reveal dimensions of being inaccessible to ordinary
    consciousness. Sunakkhatta, however, was evidently just interested
    in having pleasant supersensory experiences.

[^463]: This must have wounded his pride.

[^464]: This description of meditation is unique in the Pali canon. The
    Buddha answers Mahāli's question directly, even though
    the premise betrays Sunakkhatta's limited understanding. When a
    questioner is sincere, answering directly shows respect and builds
    trust.

[^465]: Having directly answered the original question, the Buddha
    reframed the issue on request.

[^466]: This is the first description of the four stages of awakening
    which are featured throughout the Pali canon. The three fetters are
    identity view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and
    observances ([MN
    2:11.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn2/en/sujato#11.3)).

[^467]: The five lower fetters are the three mentioned above, plus
    sensual desire and ill will ([AN
    10.13:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an10.13/en/sujato#1.5)). This is
    the non-returner, who spends their last life in an exalted
    Brahmā realm. \| A "spontaneous" rebirth is one that
    occurs without gestation in the womb, like most *devas*, or for that
    matter, Boltzmann brains.

[^468]: This is the arahant, the "worthy" or "perfected" one. Elsewhere
    it is said they abandon the five higher fetters: desire for rebirth
    in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the formless
    realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance ([AN
    10.13:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/an10.13/en/sujato#2.2)).

[^469]: This is the most fundamental of the Buddha's teachings on the
    path, declared in his first sermon ([SN
    56.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato)). It reappears in
    [DN 8:13.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#13.5), [DN
    19:61.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#61.7), and [DN
    22:21.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#21.2).

[^470]: The eight factors map roughly on to the Gradual Training thus:
    hearing the Dhamma gives rise to right view; the choice to renounce
    is right thought; ethics includes right speech, action, and
    livelihood; undertaking seclusion and sense restraint is right
    effort; developing meditation is right mindfulness; and gaining the
    four *jhānas* is right immersion. Realization of the
    Dhamma completes the circle by deepening conceptual right view to
    liberating insight. Sometimes this is expressed by adding two
    further factors, right knowledge and right liberation.

[^471]: The Buddha retells the events recorded in the next sutta, [DN
    7](https://suttacentral.net/dn7/en/sujato).

[^472]: Muṇḍiya means "shaven one"; his name is spelled
    Mandissa in some manuscripts. He appears only in this passage.
    Jāliya returns in [DN
    24:2.4.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#2.4.1), which
    recounts the farcical events following Sunakkhatta's disrobal. There
    he takes the Buddha's part against the delusional
    Pāṭikaputta favored by Sunakkhatta.

[^473]: The term "soul" (*jīva*) was favored by the
   *samaṇas*, as opposed to the "self"
    (*attā*) of the brahmins. Both are rejected by the
    Buddha as forms of "metaphysical" self: they postulate the absolute,
    eternal existence of entities that cannot be established
    empirically. The repeated demonstrative pronouns (*taṁ
    jīvaṁ taṁ sarīraṁ*) assert an
    emphatic identity.

[^474]: They evidently believed that the experience of
    jhāna would grant insight into this dilemma. But it is
    a loaded question: it assumes that the soul is real and that what
    needs determining is its relation to the body.

[^475]: Until this point, none of the experiences described are
    fundamentally incompatible with the notion of an eternal
    metaphysical self. Buddhists believe that non-Buddhists, before and
    after the Buddha, are quite capable of realizing such states.
    However, they would tend to interpret them in line with their
    previous beliefs, thus reinforcing their theories of self. Faced
    with the end of all rebirth, however, no theory of eternal self can
    stand.