[^477]: Ujuññā was a Kosalan town at which King Pasenadi
    visited the Buddha in [MN
    90](https://suttacentral.net/mn90/en/sujato). \| "Deer parks" were
    nature reservations where the animals were safe from hunters.

[^478]: Naked ascetics are still found in India today. Some Jains went
    naked, but if he were a Jain he would have been introduced as such.
    Kassapa is an ancient clan name of the brahmins, and we meet four
    naked ascetics named Kassapa in the canon (here, [SN
    12.17](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.17/en/sujato), [SN
    41.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.9/en/sujato), and [MN
    124](https://suttacentral.net/mn124/en/sujato)). They cannot be the
    same person, for at the end of each account it is said they went
    forth and attained arahantship.

[^479]: In his first sermon, the Buddha rejected extremes of
    self-mortification. There the term was *attakilamatha*
    ("self-mortification"), whereas here it is *tapas* ("heat, burning,
    fervor"). These refer to the same practices, but *tapas* points to
    the fervent ardor of the practitioner, generating an inner heat that
    "burns off" the corrupting traces of *kamma* and defilements. This
    topic is also discussed in [AN
    10.94](https://suttacentral.net/an10.94/en/sujato).

[^480]: While the self-mortification itself may be useless, the person
    who practices it may have other good qualities. The Buddha is
    cautioning against rash judgement.

[^481]: Again we see the Buddha's preferred method of establishing
    common ground first, then building an argument from there.

[^482]: Rather than logical hair-splitting, the Buddha recommends
    looking at a person's conduct.

[^483]: Here *-va* has an exclusive sense (= *eva*). Compare [Dhp
    274](https://suttacentral.net/dhp274/en/sujato): *eseva maggo
    natthañño* ("This is the path, there is no other").

[^484]: Compare [DN
    16:5.27.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.27.1).

[^485]: What follows is a description of ascetic practices undertaken by
    the Jains and similar groups. \| The phrase "course of fervent
    mortification" (*tapopakkama*) is unique to this sutta. *Pakkama*
    means "stepping out".

[^486]: Buddhist mendicants may not receive food in their hands, nor
    lick them while eating. Followers of the practices listed here would
    have walked steadily and randomly for alms, accepting only what was
    given at the time.

[^487]: Keeping sheep (*eḷaka*, for slaughter) goes against
    the Jain principle of non-violence, as does keeping weapons
    (*daṇḍa*). \| A *musala* often means "pestle", but it
    can also be a "shovel"; at [MN
    81:18.12](https://suttacentral.net/mn81/en/sujato#18.12) it is
    regarded as a virtue to not use one to dig the soil (which is
    regarded as being alive in Jainism). \| *Thusodaka* is an alcoholic
    porridge fermented from grain-husks, mentioned alongside
   *sovīraka* in the Pali commentaries and
    Carakasaṁhitā 27g.191.

[^488]: It is not easy to meaningfully distinguish the various kinds of
    grain.

[^489]: All are extremely uncomfortable. Christian ascetics wore a "hair
    shirt" in order to "mortify the flesh" .

[^490]: Jain ascetics tear out their hair at ordination, rather than
    shaving.

[^491]: Remaining in one posture for months or years at a time is one of
    the most difficult practices.

[^492]: Strict Jain ascetics did not bathe.

[^493]: At [Kd
    6:14.6.3](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd6/en/sujato#14.6.3) the
    four "great unnaturals" (or "filthy edibles",
   *mahāvikaṭa*) are said to be feces, urine, ash, and
    clay. At [MN 12:49.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#49.3)
    the Buddha said he ate the "unnatural things" of feces and urine
    when undertaking ascetic practices.

[^494]: This seems out of place here. It was a Brahmanical practice ([SN
    7.21](https://suttacentral.net/sn7.21/en/sujato)), as the Jains
    refused to bathe at all. Indeed, bathing three times a day in the
    Indian climate would, for most of the year, be quite pleasant.

[^495]: The term "accomplishment in mind" (*cittasampadā*)
    is equivalent to "accomplishment in immersion"
    (*samādhisampadā*). More generally, when *citta* is
    used in the context of meditation, it is normally a synonym of
   *samādhi*.

[^496]: *Mettā* is universal love and good will free from
    attachment. As well as being a foundation for good character and
    healthy emotional development, it serves to lead the mind into deep
    meditation of *jhāna*.

[^497]: The Buddha was criticized for going soft after abandoning
    austere practices, but here he flips the script, arguing that it is
    inner transformation that is really hard, not outer shows of
    mortification.

[^498]: Note that the heading for this section in the
    Mahāsaṅgīti edition uses *samādhi* rather
    than *citta*. Headings were added by later editors, and are not part
    of the original text.

[^499]: This is the ethical practices as described in the Gradual
    Training.

[^500]: "Mortification in disgust of sin" renders
   *tapojigucchā*; *tapo* is "fervent mortification" and
   *jigucchā* is "loathing, disgust". It captures the
    severity with which practitioners regarded the "evil" or "sin" with
    which they were infected, like a quasi-physical stain on the soul,
    and the burning flame of white-hot pain required to cauterize their
    spiritual wounds.

[^501]: The Buddha repurposes the concept of "disgust of sin", which
    here stands in the place of meditation (*samādhi*).

[^502]: A "lion's roar" is an unapologetic proclamation of spiritual
    supremacy.

[^503]: The Buddha is referring to the events of the Udumbarikasutta
    ([DN 25](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato)). There Nigrodha
    is referred to as a "wanderer" (*paribbājaka*) who
    according to the commentary was clothed. The term
   *tapabrahmacārī* here is unique and is not explained in
    the commentary. I think it means he was a celibate student of a
    Brahmanical teacher.

[^504]: This probation is laid down in the Vinaya at [Kd
    1:38.1.5](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#38.1.5). The
    candidate shaves, dons the robes, takes refuge, and asks for
    probation. They must show good conduct and restraint, diligence in
    duties, and enthusiasm for the Buddha's teachings and practice.

[^505]: In addition to individual exceptions, there are general
    exceptions for dreadlocked ascetics, since they believe in kamma,
    and for the Buddha's relatives.