[^506]: Poṭṭhapāda appears only here; he was named for a
    month of the lunar calendar (August/September). \|
    Mallikā was the chief queen of Pasenadi, and her hall
    is mentioned in a similar context at [MN
    78:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn78/en/sujato#1.3). The commentary
    explains that the brahmins, Jains, and others would assemble there
    to "debate their beliefs" (*samayaṁ pavadanti*).
    Evidently the monastery grounds had accommodation for many ascetics
    of different beliefs, but only "one hall" where they would gather
    for debate. We hear many times of such debates, but here we catch a
    glimpse of a place that was set up to facilitate them. For
   *-ācīra*, read in the sense of "boundary, hedge"
    (commentary: *timbarūrukkhapantiyā
    parikkhittattā*; cf. Sanskrit *prācīra*,
    "enclosure, hedge, fence, wall").

[^507]: According to the commentary, when he approached the vicinity of
    the city gate, he decided to check the position of the sun and
    noticed that it was too early to enter. The commentary and
    sub-commentary explain that it only sounds like the Buddha was in
    doubt, for Buddhas deliberate before deciding on a course of action.

[^508]: This can be understood as answering the criticism voiced in [DN
    8:22.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#22.2), that the
    Buddha was afraid to speak in an assembly.

[^509]: In contrast with the silence of the Buddha's community at [DN
    2:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#10.7).

[^510]: The Buddha encourages quiet for the sake of mental development;
    Poṭṭhapāda does it for the sake of reputation.

[^511]: Poṭṭhapāda's address is almost overly deferential.

[^512]: Always polite, the Buddha begins by showing an interest in them.

[^513]: *Abhisaññā* does not appear elsewhere. Here the
    prefix *abhi-* means not "higher", but rather "about, concerning".
    Compare *abhidhamma* at [MN
    32:8.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn32/en/sujato#8.6): *dve
    bhikkhū abhidhammakathaṁ kathenti* ("two
    mendicants engage in discussion about the teaching"); also
   *abhivinaya* at [AN
    3.140:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/an3.140/en/sujato#4.4). The
    commentary here says *abhi-* is a mere particle, so it need not be
    translated.

[^514]: This discussion appears to have been directly sparked by the
    difficult passage in Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 2.4.12 and 4.5.13. The sage
    Yājñavalkya, teaching his wife Maitreyī,
    says that the true Self is a sheer mass of "consciousness"
    (*vijñāna*, Pali *viññāṇa*), which is
    "great, endless, infinite reality". After realizing this, he says,
    there is no "perception" (*saṁjñā*, Pali
   *saññā*), a statement that bewilders even the wise
    Maitreyī. He explains that only in an apparent state of
    duality (*dvaitamiva*) do the separate functions of sense
    consciousness operate. When all is realized as the Self, how, he
    asks, can one know that owing to which all this is known? He is
    implicitly distinguishing between *viññāna* as
    "infinite" (= *vi-*) knowing and *saññā* as
    "constrained" (*saṁ-*) knowing.
    Yājñavalkya says the separate Self emerges with these
    elements and vanishes with them (*etebhyo bhūtebhyaḥ
    samutthāya tānyevānu
    vinaśyati*), but he does not explain how or why this
    happens, which is the question the theorists here attempt to
    address.

[^515]: Here perception is not identified with the "person" (*purisa*),
    but rather belongs to them (cf. *etaṁ mama*, "this is
    mine"). In the discussion to follow, the Buddha only directly
    addresses this theory, while the remainder are included by
    inference.

[^516]: This idiom is also at [SN
    47.19:1.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.19/en/sujato#1.10).

[^517]: The self is defined as perception (*eso me attā*),
    one of the five aggregates. Compare the various theories of the self
    and perception at [DN
    1:2.38.0](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.0).

[^518]: Implying that at such times a person lacks a "self". This is
    perhaps related to Yājñavalkya's: "That man, when born,
    acquiring a body, is connected with ills (the bodily organs); and
    when he dies, departing, he discards those ills"
    (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.8).

[^519]: The commentary says these were devotees of
   *āthabbaṇa*, i.e the practices preserved in the
    Atharvaveda. This "fourth Veda" is mentioned only once by name in
    the early Pali ([Snp
    4.14:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.14/en/sujato#13.1)), where,
    as here, it is associated with the performance of magic and the
    casting of spells. The commentary fairly drips with contempt:
    "Allegedly, the Āthabbaṇa practitioners cast a spell,
    showing a creature's head as if cut off, or their hand as if cut
    off, or as if dead. Then they show them back to normal; imagining
    so, they say, 'From cessation they have arisen.'"

[^520]: See [DN 29:16.20](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#16.20)
    for *upakaḍḍhati* and *apakaḍḍhati* in
    this sense.

[^521]: *Pakataññū* is not elsewhere attested in the
    suttas, but it is found in the Vinaya, for example at [Bu Pc
    72:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc72/en/sujato#1.8)).

[^522]: Here the Buddha argues that, since it is possible to change the
    nature of one's own mind through practice, such changes cannot be
    random.

[^523]: It is is unusual if not unique to add "said the Buddha"
    (*bhagavā avoca*) in such a context. Normally, once a
    speaker starts, the text does not insert extra tags identifying the
    speaker without a reason, such as an interruption for a question.

[^524]: Sinhalese manuscripts, followed by PTS, include the paragraphs
    on the metaphor of the king's security ([DN
    2:63.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#63.1)) and on
    guarding the sense doors here.

[^525]: Progress through the *jhānas* is explained in terms
    of the refining of perceptions.

[^526]: "Subtle and true" is *sukhumasacca*, a term that appears only
    here.

[^527]: We have encountered the "formless attainments"
    (*arūpasamāpatti*) before, where they formed a refined
    basis for attachment to self ([DN
    1:3.13.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#3.13.4)). Here they
    appear as part of the gradual refinement of consciousness through
    the cessation of increasingly subtle perceptions.

[^528]: This is the vision of light that later came to be called a
    "sign" (*nimitta*). In the first four *jhānas* this
    persists as a "subtle" (*sukhuma*) reflection or echo of the
    "substantial" (*olārika*) material basis of meditation,
    such as the breath or the parts of the body. Even though it is a
    purely mental phenomenon, it is still "form" (*rūpa*)
    since it has physical properties like light or extension.

[^529]: The "light" (*obhāsa*) of *jhāna*
    grows from "limited" (*paritta*) to "limitless"
    (*appamāṇa*, [MN
    128:29.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn128/en/sujato#29.1)). Then the
    perception of even this limitless light vanishes, leaving only
    infinite space.

[^530]: Perception of infinite space fades away leaving only the
    infinite consciousness that is aware.

[^531]: The meditator is no longer even aware of infinite consciousness,
    but of the even vaster nothingness.

[^532]: The last of the four formless attainments is the dimension of
    neither perception nor non-perception. Since this, by definition,
    lies beyond the scope of perception, it is not included here.

[^533]: For *sakasaññī* ("takes charge of their own
    perception"), see [Bu Pj
    2:6.2.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj2/en/sujato#6.2.2).
    One relevant factor in determining whether an object has been stolen
    is if the accused "perceives it as their own". Here it means that
    the meditator understands that they can evolve their own perceptions
    through meditation.

[^534]: "Intend and choose" is *ceteyyaṁ
    abhisaṅkhareyyaṁ* (1st singular optative). These
    synonyms are used in the sense of a subtle sense of will or
    intentionality that underlies such attainments ([MN
    52:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn52/en/sujato#14.3)) and which
    must be let go lest they generate rebirth ([MN
    140:22.10](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#22.10)).

[^535]: Compare with "progressive cessation" ([AN
    9.31](https://suttacentral.net/an9.31/en/sujato)), "progressive
    tranquilizing of conditions" ([SN
    36.15](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.15/en/sujato)), "progressive
    meditations" ([AN 9.32](https://suttacentral.net/an9.32/en/sujato)),
    etc. \| "Awareness" is *sampajāna*, which we have
    encountered previously as "situational awareness" in daily
    activities, or as the "awareness" in the third *jhāna*.
    Here it refers to a reflective capacity to understand the nature of
    deep meditation in terms of causality. The term was adopted by
    Patañjalī, who defined
   *saṁprajñātasamādhi* in a way that is clearly drawn
    from the Buddhist definition of *jhāna*. It is attained
    with *vitakka*, *vicāra*, *ānanda*
    ("bliss"), and *āsmitā*. According to the commentary,
    this last term is "experience of the one self",
   *ekātmikā saṁvid*) and so is probably
    adapted from the Buddhist factor of *ekaggatā*.
    (Yogasūtra 1.17).

[^536]: Taking the kernel of Yājñavalkya's theory of the
    cessation of limited perception, the Buddha has expanded it in
    psychological and practical detail, while leaving out the
    metaphysical assumption of the Self.

[^537]: Poṭṭhapāda shows the Buddha that he has been paying
    attention. Notice how it is culturally assumed that it is possible
    to retain and repeat the exact content of the teaching.

[^538]: The meaning of this is not clear to me. It might mean that
    insight can be developed based on any of the stages of meditation,
    so for that person their peak of perception is different to
    another's. The commentary says that it refers to different
    meditation subjects, or simply to different occasions of meditation.

[^539]: Poṭṭhapāda's distinction between "perception"
    (*saññā*) and "knowledge" (*ñāṇa*) echoes
    Yājñavalkya's distinction between "perception"
    (*saṁjā*) and "consciousness" (*vijñāna*,
    or in the repeated passage at 4.5.13, *prajñāna*).

[^540]: Perception has been described in terms of the progress through
    more refined meditations (*samādhi*). Only then does
    the "knowledge" (*ñāṇa*) of insight arise.

[^541]: The term "specific condition" (*idappaccayā*) is
    well known from dependent origination (eg. [SN
    12.20:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.20/en/sujato#2.3)), where
    it applies to the general situation of ongoing existence in
    transmigration. When developing insight, a meditator takes their own
    meditation experience as their primary locus. This is then
    generalized to an understanding of the nature of conscious
    existence.

[^542]: This draws from the initial presentation of different theories
    of the person and perception ([DN
    9:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#6.4)).

[^543]: "Believe" is *paccesi*, literally "fall back on". It implies
    that an idea is something one relies on or takes as fundamental. The
    Buddha wants to know where Poṭṭhapāda stands before
    exploring this topic.

[^544]: Despite his previous questions about perception and the self,
    Poṭṭhapāda takes his stand on a purely materialist
    view, identifying the "self" with the organic "substantial" body.

[^545]: Again, the Buddha does not rush to tell Poṭṭhapāda
    he is right or wrong, but rather draws out the implications of his
    statement.

[^546]: Here *tiṭṭhateva* is not "leaving aside", but
    "remains". Compare the similar construction at [MN
    107:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn107/en/sujato#13.1).

[^547]: This is the "subtle" (*sukhuma*) body, corresponding with the
    form experienced in the four jhānas. All manuscripts
    appear to be missing the expected *rūpī* in this
    passage, but it occurs in the corresponding passage on
    "reincarnation" below.

[^548]: This identifies the self as that which is experienced in the
    formless attainments. Poṭṭhapāda is simply cycling
    through possible self theories without really thinking through the
    implications.

[^549]: Poṭṭhapāda can only attest a belief in various
    theories and still does not know how to assess them for himself.

[^550]: The text shifts from *añña* "other" (eg.
   *aññadiṭṭhikena*) to *aññatra*
    (*aññatr'āyogena*), which normally means
    "apart from". Most authorities follow the commentary in taking
   *aññatra* here in the sense of "other". However I think
    the change of sense is deliberate; the Buddha is not discouraging
    them, merely informing them what it will take.

[^551]: This is the famous list of ten "undeclared points", which are
    found throughout the suttas (eg. [MN
    25:10.21](https://suttacentral.net/mn25/en/sujato#10.21), [MN
    63:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn63/en/sujato#2.3), [MN
    72:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn72/en/sujato#3.1), and the whole
    of SN 44). They seem to have functioned as a kind of checklist by
    which philosophers could be evaluated and classified. \| The word
   *loka* occurs in a number of senses, but here it refers to the
    entire "cosmos" of countless worlds.

[^552]: This phrase recurs at [SN
    21.9:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn21.9/en/sujato#1.4) and [AN
    3.64:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/an3.64/en/sujato#11.1), with
    some variant readings.

[^553]: The commentary says Citta was the son of an elephant trainer.
    Here he shows greater respect to the Buddha than does
    Poṭṭhapāda.

[^554]: This point seems to be lost on a number of modern commentators,
    who infer from passages such as the ten undeclared points that the
    Buddha refused to make any definitive declarations at all. The
    Buddha, rather, was a *vibhajjavādin* ([MN
    99:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#4.4), [AN
    10.94:4.7](https://suttacentral.net/an10.94/en/sujato#4.7)), "one
    who speaks after analysis".

[^555]: See [DN
    1:2.38.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.2).

[^556]: The Buddha does not rely on rumor; he begins by checking his
    facts with those concerned. Not only does this affirm his commitment
    to truth, it shows respect and establishes a common ground from
    which the argument proceeds.

[^557]: The verb *viharati* means "dwell", and functions as an auxiliary
    verb implying duration. In spiritual contexts it often means "a
    period or state of meditation". This first question is asking
    whether they see such a state in a regular meditation practice.

[^558]: Perhaps they might not be able to develop a meditation for
    seeing that self, but at some point they may have had some sort of
    perception or vision or insight.

[^559]: Since they have no experience, they might at least have an idea
    how to reach that experience.

[^560]: They haven't even heard a report about it.

[^561]: "No demonstrable basis" renders *appāṭihīrakataṁ*.
    This is related to *pāṭihāra*, which is usually
    understood as "miracle, wonder". But the root sense is
    "demonstration" and the sense of "display of wonder" is secondary.

[^562]: *Janapadakalyāṇī* is typically rendered as "the
    most beautiful lady in the land". At [SN
    47.20:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.20/en/sujato#2.2) we learn
    that she is a dazzling singer and dancer. And while she was famed
    for her beauty ([Ud
    3.2:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/ud3.2/en/sujato#9.1)), the word
   *kalyāṇa* normally means "(morally) good, fine, lovely"
    and does not refer solely to her appearance.

[^563]: *Nisseni* only occurs elsewhere in [Bu Ss
    6:2.3.6](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss6/en/sujato#2.3.6)
    and [Bu Ss
    7:2.67](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-ss7/en/sujato#2.67),
    where it is something carried, i.e. a ladder rather than a flight of
    stairs.

[^564]: *Attapaṭilābha* is literally "re-acquisition of
    self", where *attā* is explained by the commentary as
   *attabhāva*, the "state of the self" or "life-form"
    that is acquired at rebirth, i.e. the body (*sarīra*),
    whether material or immaterial.

[^565]: These recap the three theses of perception and the self posted
    by Poṭṭhapāda from [DN
    9:22.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn9/en/sujato#22.1).

[^566]: Compare with the similar sentiment at [SN
    22.2:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.2/en/sujato#10.1).

[^567]: The Buddha points to the experience to demonstrate what he is
    talking about, rather than offering a long theoretical explanation.
   *Ayaṁ* is a pronoun of presence, used to indicate what
    is apparent before the subject.

[^568]: Citta is asking an ontological question, assuming that these
    three states are existent realities of the self.

[^569]: The Buddha reframes the question as one of conventional
    description. He is describing states in which one might be reborn,
    not underlying ontologies.

[^570]: This anticipates one of the great philosophical debates of
    sectarian Buddhists which gave rise to the
    Sarvāstivāda, the school whose core doctrine was that
    "all exists (in the past, future, and present)". The Buddha
    describes past, future, and present with the three grammatical
    tenses.

[^571]: Compare Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 3.3.3.2.

[^572]: Words such as "self" have a conventional usage and in that
    context are perfectly fine. But what that "self" refers to is
    constantly changing, as it is reincarnated in different states. It
    is like a river which keeps the same name even though the water is
    always changing. If, driven by attachment, we assume there is a
    metaphysical reality underlying the conventional "self", we step
    beyond what can be empirically verified. Note, however, that the
    Buddha is *not* asserting that there are two levels of truth,
    conventional and ultimate, a distinction not found in early
    Buddhism. \| Compare [MN
    139:3.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn139/en/sujato#3.9), [MN
    74:13.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn74/en/sujato#13.1).

[^573]: In [AN 6.60](https://suttacentral.net/an6.60/en/sujato) we find
    Citta Hatthisāriputta, still a somewhat junior monk,
    rudely interrupting his seniors. After admonition he disrobed, but
    he ordained again and later achieved arahantship. We can reconcile
    these two accounts by recognizing that the phrase *acira* "not long
    after" is a conventional term, which might be several years. Thus
    the events of AN 6.60 occurred some time between his ordination and
    awakening.
