[^581]: This was the scene for some controversial discussions with Jains
    ([MN 56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato), [SN
    42.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn42.8/en/sujato)), and
    Sāriputta's touching declaration of faith shortly
    before his passing ([SN
    47.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.12/en/sujato), [DN
    16:1.16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#1.16.1), [DN
    28](https://suttacentral.net/dn28/en/sujato)). It is probably the
    Pāvā (modern Pawapuri) at which Mahāvīra
    died according to the Jain tradition.

[^582]: Kevaḍḍha is mentioned only here. Manuscripts spell
    his name variously as Kevaddha or Kevaṭṭa
    ("fisherman"). The Chinese form means "sturdy" (from
   *dṛḍha*) and thus supports Kevaḍḍha.

[^583]: I have been asked to do the same thing for the same reason.

[^584]: In fact it is forbidden in [Kd
    15:8.2.23](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd15/en/sujato#8.2.23).

[^585]: The reading *dhaṁsemi* is dubious. An old Burmese
    manuscript has the reading *dhammaṁ desemi*, which
    echoes the Buddha just above. Note too that Kevaḍḍha
    urges the Buddha to "direct" the monks (*samādisatu*,
    from the same root as *desemi*). I think the tension is deliberate:
    Kevaḍḍha says he isn't telling the Buddha how to teach,
    but he absolutely is. Other readings convey the sense "attack,
    insult", but this seems out of place.

[^586]: As noted previously, the basic sense of
   *pāṭihāriya* is "demonstration", and as the context
    here shows, it may or may not involve a "demonstration of wonders"
    i.e. a "miracle".

[^587]: These three are mentioned frequently in the suttas. Only the
    last is endorsed by the Buddha, as it leads to genuine growth.

[^588]: Their priors have been confirmed.

[^589]: Note how a skeptical mindset sticks closer to the truth.

[^590]: "Spell" is *vijjā* (Sanskrit *vidyā*,
    "(potent) knowledge", cf. English "wicca", "wizard", "witch"). The
    commentary says it was practiced by the seers of
    Gandhāra (north-west Pakistan). Jain tradition also
    knows a Gandhārī mantra, but attribute it to certain
   *vidyādhara* deities. Sanskrit tradition similarly
    knows of a *vidyādevī* ("lore goddess") named
    Gandhārī. Gandhāra was an ancient land of
    learning, and a convenient location for exotic magics.

[^591]: These feats that have nothing to do with spiritual growth, hence
    they may be produced or perhaps faked by a variety of means.

[^592]: "Revealing" is *ādesana*, from root *dis* "to
    indicate, show, or point".

[^593]: The Pali terms here are *citta*, *cetasika*, *vitakka*, and
   *vicāra*.

[^594]: Here we have *mano* (twice) and *citta*.

[^595]: From *maṇi*, "gem". Magical gems are a common
    feature of Indian storytelling. Buddhist stories often feature the
    "wish-granting gem" (*cintāmaṇi*), which according to
    the commentary is meant here.

[^596]: This story is presented as an actual event, but is phrased like
    a fable.

[^597]: The question is about meditation, not the annihilation of the
    material world. The first four *jhānas* are based on
    the "subtle form" (*sukhumarūpa*) that manifests as
    light in deep meditation. He is asking how to go beyond this to the
    formless attainments.

[^598]: The mendicant has already well developed the
   *jhānas*. \| "Controlling the body as far as the
    Brahmā realm" is one of the "demonstrations of psychic
    power" listed above.

[^599]: The "gods of the Four Great Kings" are deities born in a realm
    subject to the overlords known as the Four Great Kings. These
    deities inhabit the lowest of the celestial realms.

[^600]: These are powerful spirits who guard the four quarters. In [AN
    8.36](https://suttacentral.net/an8.36/en/sujato) it is explained
    that they, like the other leading gods mentioned below, achieved
    their station due to their greater generosity and morality.

[^601]: The "thirty-three" enjoy refined sensual delights. The number is
    a reduplication of the trinity. In Buddhist texts they are not
    enumerated, but Yājñavalkya reckons them as eight
    Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Ādityas, plus Indra and
    Prajāpati (Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 3.9.2). The final pair are elsewhere said to
    be Dyaus ("Heaven" = Zeus) and Pṛthivī ("Earth"), or
    the twin Aśvins.

[^602]: Conventionally known as "lord of gods", but in fact the ruler
    only of the relatively lowly realm of the thirty-three. He is Vedic
    Indra, heroic slayer of the dragon Vṛtra, and is the
    most personally known god in the Pali Canon.

[^603]: Gods in this realm (spelled *yāma*, "of Yama") are
    subjects of the god of the dead, Yama.

[^604]: The previous deities achieved their station by mere morality and
    generosity, not by *jhāna*. The gods of
    Brahmā's Host practiced the first *jhāna*,
    but they do not know what lies beyond.

[^605]: The same passage appears in [DN
    1:2.5.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.5.2), where it
    also had a satirical tone, poking fun at the pomposity of religious
    titles.

[^606]: Even Brahmā's community are not confident.

[^607]: This passage may be one of the sources for the later use of
   *nimitta* to mean the appearance of light that signifies the
    approach of *jhāna*.

[^608]: He puffs his own chest, but like the ascetic teachers of [DN
    2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato), he does not answer the
    question.

[^609]: He addresses Brahmā with *āvuso*. This
    is often translated as "friend", but the root is *āyu*
    ("age") and it is respectful not familiar.

[^610]: Rather than trying to engage with Brahmā's agenda,
    he keeps restating his question. This is a skillful way of curbing
    narcissism.

[^611]: Brahmā is embarrassed to reveal his ignorance.
    Perhaps a satire of Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
    3.2.13, where Yājñavalkya takes
    Jāratkārava Ārtabhāga by the hand and
    leads him aside for a secret discussion.

[^612]: At least he is honest about his lack of knowledge, even if not
    publicly.

[^613]: The following verses are difficult because they speak of a kind
    of consciousness at the start and the cessation of consciousness at
    the end. The simplest way to resolve this is to assume there are two
    distinct questions.

[^614]: This is a rephrasing of the original question, asking where the
    four "form" *jhānas* end.

[^615]: Here starts the second question, asking the deeper question of
    how all these things end. A similar list of descriptors elsewhere
    describes things that are not stolen ([Snp
    3.9:45.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#45.1)) or the
    kinds of sentient beings ([Snp
    1.8:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.8/en/sujato#4.3)). These are
    aspects of how "form" manifests in desirable or undesirable ways.

[^616]: The first four terms in this verse are identical with the first
    four terms in Yājñavalkya's description of the
    immutable Brahman as "neither coarse nor fine, neither short nor
    long" at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 3.8.8.

[^617]: "Where nothing appears" (*anidassanaṁ*) here is a
    synonym for "formless" (see eg. [MN
    21:14.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn21/en/sujato#14.8), "space is
    formless and invisible", *ākāso arūpī
    anidassano*). Normally the colors and images seen in the "form"
    absorptions are described as "visible" (eg. [DN
    16:3.29.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.29.1)), so this
    indicates the formless attainments.

[^618]: "Infinite" (*ananta*) is the direct qualifier of
    "consciousness", but in the Pali it is shifted to the next line to
    fit the meter. It indicates the second of the formless attainments.
    Yājñavalkya describes consciousness as infinite in the
    famous passage at Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
    2.4.12. \| *Pabhaṁ* means "luminous", as with the
    deities that are "self-luminous" (*sayaṁpabhā*, [DN
    27:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#10.3)). *Sabbato
    pabhaṁ* ("luminous all-round") is synonymous with
   *pariyodāta* ("bright", literally "white all over"), a
    stock descriptor of the mind of fourth *jhāna*, on
    which the formless states are based.

[^619]: I read these verses as broken into two statements. The first
    part, ending here, speaks of the formless attainments as "infinite
    consciousness", agreeing with the highest of the Brahmanical
    meditative sages. The following verses go further to speak of the
    cessation of consciousness.

[^620]: According to dependent origination, when consciousness ceases,
    name and form cease, and with it the manifestation of all things
    desirable and undesirable in the world.