[^638]: Manasākaṭa is mentioned only here.

[^639]: Aciravatī is called Rapti today. It was one of the
    great rivers that flowed from the Himalayas through Kosala into the
    Ganges.

[^640]: Similar discussions are found in [MN
    98](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato) = [Snp
    3.9](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato) and [DN
    27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato). \| The compound
   *maggāmagga* can be read either as "what is the path
    and what is not the path" (per commentary, *magge ca amagge ca*), or
    as "the variety of paths" (compare *phalāphala*, "all
    sorts of fruit"). Here, however, they are concerned to distinguish
    one path as correct.

[^641]: This must have been earlier than Pokkharasāti's
    conversion at [DN
    3:2.22.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#2.22.1).
    Pokkharasāti was a family man who denied the reality of
    superhuman meditative attainments ([MN
    99:10.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.4)) and
    emphasized ethics and duties over lineage ([MN
    98:3.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#3.7)), which agrees
    with him being cited on ethical matters at Āpastamba Dharmasūtra
    1.6.19.7 and 1.10.28. \| *Brahmasahabyatā* does not
    mean "union with Brahmā" but rather "rebirth as one of
    the members of Brahma's retinue" (see eg. [AN
    5.34:9.4](https://suttacentral.net/an5.34/en/sujato#9.4)). The
    non-dualist concept that the limited personal self merges with the
    cosmic divinity is expressed in Pali, rather, with such phrases as
   *so attā so loko* ("the self is identical with the
    cosmos"). \| For *añjasa* ("direct route") see [SN
    12.65:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65/en/sujato#7.1) and note.

[^642]: In Pali we never meet Tārukkha and he is only
    mentioned in his absence. He evidently advocated that lineage rather
    than conduct made one a brahmin ([MN
    98:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#3.4)). There is a
    Tārukṣya whose view was that union (with
    Brahmā) arose with the conjunction of speech and
    breath; this was discussed alongside the views of many other
    brahmins (Aitareya Āraṇyaka 3.1.6.1;
    Śāṅkhāyana Āraṇyaka 7.19). In Rig Veda
    8.46.32 a certain Balbūtha Tarukṣa the
    Dāsa makes an offering to a sage. Sāyaṇa,
    the Vedic commentator, says that Balbūtha
    Tarukṣa was a guardian of cows, evidently alluding to
    the Aitareya Āraṇyaka, which describes
    Tārukṣya as a guardian of his teacher's cows, thus
    locating Tārukṣya in the lineage of
    Tarukṣa. Hiraṇyakeśīgṛhyasūtra 2.8.19 also
    mentions him as a teacher, there spelled Tarukṣa.

[^643]: Identified by Wijesekera (*A Pali Reference to
    Brāhmaṇa-Caraṇas*, Adyar Library Bulletin,
    vol 20, 1956; reprinted in *Buddhist and Vedic Studies*) and
    Jayatilleke (*Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge*, p. 480). I use
    the familiar Sanskrit forms, as the Pali has several dubious
    spellings and variants. Their texts and corresponding Vedas are
    respectively: Adhvaryu = Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (incl.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad; White Yajur Veda);
    Taittirīya = Taittirīya
    Brāhmaṇa (Black Yajur Veda); Chāndogya =
    Chāndogya Brāhmaṇa (Sāman
    Veda); Cāndrāyaṇa (omitted from MS edition) =
    Kauṣītaki Brāhmaṇa (Rig Veda; spelling
    established by Wijesekera; see below at [DN
    13:16.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#16.2));
    Bahvṛca = Bahvṛca Brāhmaṇa
    (Rig Veda; incorporated in Aitareya and Kauśītaki.)
    This is the only time the Pali canon mentions these schools, but in
    some cases we can identify them with brahmins in the canon. Examples
    include the murmuring Chāndogya brahmin ([Ud
    1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.4/en/sujato)); or the Buddha's
    former teachers, who evidently hailed from the Addhariya tradition
    of the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa ([MN
    26:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#15.1)ff.). \|
    Jayatilleke notes that the Śatapatha describes its own adherents as
    Adhvaryu (*addhariyā*), those priests of the Yajur Veda
    responsible for the physical acts at the ritual.

[^644]: Earlier they were arguing over which one of the paths was
    correct, whereas now they have shifted to a more universalist "many
    roads up the same mountain" position. When speaking with each other
    they saw each others' views as contradictory, but when speaking with
    an outsider they adopted a more conciliatory position.

[^645]: The ten names in Pali include the seven authors of the so-called
    "family books" of the Rig Veda (Maṇḍalas 2--8). As
    founders of poetic lineages, we often find works by their
    descendants, which are not always confined to their dedicated family
    book. Poems by the other three authors are mostly outside the family
    books. Thus the sages listed here cover most of the Rig Veda,
    although the Vedic tradition records many other authors as well. \|
    Aṭṭhaka = Atri Bhauma (Maṇḍala 5, rather
    than Aṣṭaka Vaiśvāmitra of 10.104);
    Vāmaka = Vamra(ka) Vaikhānasa (10.99; see
    9.66); Vāmadeva = Vāmadeva Gautama
    (Maṇḍala 4); Vessāmitta =
    Viśvāmitra Gāthina (Maṇḍala
    3); Yamadaggi = Jamadagni Bhārgava, a descendant of
    Bhṛgu (several hymns mostly in Maṇḍalas 9
    and 10); Aṅgīrasa = Aṅgirasa, identified
    with Agni as the founder of a lineage of poet-singers
    (Maṇḍala 8); Bhāradvāja =
    Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya
    (Maṇḍala 6); Vāseṭṭha =
    Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi
    (Maṇḍala 7); Kassapa = Kaśyapa
    Mārīca (several hymns mostly in Maṇḍalas 9
    and 10); Bhagu = Bhṛgu, the bringer of fire from heaven
    whose adoptive descendant was Gṛtsamada
    Bhārgava Śaunaka (Maṇḍala 2).

[^646]: Unlike the Buddhist monk at [DN
    11:80.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn11/en/sujato#80.1).

[^647]: "No demonstrable basis" is *appāṭihīrakataṁ*.

[^648]: The "blind following the blind" is also at [MN
    95:13.24](https://suttacentral.net/mn95/en/sujato#13.24) and [MN
    99:9.25](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#9.25).
    Maitrī Upaniṣad 7.8--9 turns it around,
    saying that the blind teach false doctrines aimed at destroying the
    Vedas, "the doctrine of not-self" (*nairātmyavāda*), an
    obvious reference to Buddhists. We also find it at
    Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.5,
    Mahābhārata 2.38.3, and the Jain Sūyagaḍa
    1.1.2.19.

[^649]: Kuṣītaka worshiped the rising and setting sun and
    moon, turning himself to follow their course (Kauṣītaki
    Upaniṣad 2.7--9). He founded the Kauṣītaki
    lineage, referred to above as "those who follow the course of the
    moon" (*cāndrāyaṇa*).

[^650]: Indra taught Bhāradvāja a new threefold knowledge
    by which he might become immortal and realize companionship
    (*sāyujya*) with the sun (Taittirīya
    Brāhmaṇa 3.10.11.15).

[^651]: The bulk of the Vedic texts consist of prayers and invocations
    to various gods.

[^652]: Soma is the ritual drug of exhilaration, identified with the
    moon. \| Vedic Varuṇa was the god of command, the king
    of tough rule. \| Īsāna (Sanskrit Īśāna)
    was created by Pajāpati as "ruler", said to be the sun
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 6.1.3). He was later identified
    with Rudra and Śiva. \| Pajāpati ("progenitor") was the
    lonely god of creation; the heat of his fervent exertions (*tapas*)
    created the world and all things in it (Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 6). \| Brahmā, like
    Pajāpati, is also a creator god, but is the divine
    power immanent within creation, rather than the forgotten instigator
    of the past. \| The Mahāsaṅgīti reading Mahiddhi
    ("great power") does not seem to correspond with any particular
    Vedic deity. Accept the BJT reading Mahinda (Sanskrit Mahendra), the
    "Great Indra", said to be a title of Indra bestowed after slaying
    the dragon Vṛtra (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa
    2.5.4.9). \| Yama ("twin", with his incestuous sister
    Yamī) was born immortal but chose mortality, becoming
    the god of the dead.

[^653]: I wonder if this is a satire on the idea of
   *upaniṣad* ("sitting near"); even as they affirm their
    commitment to their texts, they drift apart (*visāra*)
    into separate schools and ideologies.

[^654]: The close *-ti* has apparently confused some editors;
    Vāseṭṭha is quoting what he has heard.

[^655]: Here the four *brahmavihāras* ("meditations of
    Brahmā") stand in place of the four
   *jhānas*. *Brahmavihāras* are simply one
    of the means by which *jhānas* may be attained, chosen
    here to fit the stated goal of teaching the path to
    Brahmā. The suttas treat them as pre-Buddhist, but they
    have not been traced as a group in pre-Buddhist texts. However, they
    are shared with later non-Buddhist texts such as
    Yogasūtra 1.33 and the Jain
    Tattvārthasūtra 7.11. \| "Love" (*mettā*)
    is a universal positive regard and well-wishing free of personal
    desires or attachments. It ultimately derives from the Vedic in the
    sense of "union"; Mitra was the god of alliances (Rig Veda 3.59).

[^656]: The mind in *jhāna* is so powerful that it
    effectively overrides any limited kamma, including ordinary good or
    bad deeds. Unless they have committed serious crimes with a fixed
    kammic result such as matricide, etc., the meditator will be reborn
    in a Brahmā realm.

[^657]: "Compassion" (*karuṇā*) is the quality of empathy
    with the suffering of another or oneself and the wish to remove it.

[^658]: "Rejoicing" (*muditā*) is joyful celebration in the
    success of others or oneself, free of jealousy or cynicism.

[^659]: Equanimity (*upekkhā*) is literally "close
    watching", not interfering but standing ready when needed. It is not
    indifference, which is why it emerges only at the end, after the
    positive emotions are developed.

[^660]: A brahmin student who for their whole life practices
    harmlessness for all beings---except at holy places---attains the
    world of Brahmā (Chāndogya
    Upaniṣad 8.15.1). The exception for holy places is, of
    course, to allow for the sacrifice.

[^661]: Here the entire concluding section of the Gradual Training
    dealing with wisdom is omitted, as the aim is limited to teaching
    rebirth with Brahmā to Brahmanical laypeople, rather
    than teaching liberation. Vāseṭṭha and
    Bhāradvāja later applied to ordain, in which time the
    Buddha taught the full path to Nibbana ([DN
    27:7.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#7.8)).

[^662]: They also went for refuge in similar circumstances at [MN
    98:14.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn98/en/sujato#14.4) = [Snp
    3.9:69.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.9/en/sujato#69.3). According
    to the commentary, that was the first time they went for refuge,
    while this was the second time. This makes sense in terms of the
    progress of the teachings, for there they discuss what makes a
    brahmin, whereas here they ask the more subtle question how to
    achieve rebirth with Brahmā. The discussion, too, is on
    a more detailed level, with a more explicit criticism of the
    brahmins. Nonetheless, it is difficult to square the details of the
    narratives, for the opening of this sutta depicts
    Vāseṭṭha and Bhāradvāja speaking about the
    Buddha by reputation rather than as devotees who have previously met
    him and gone for refuge.
