[^161]: This sutta with its commentary was translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi
    in his *The Great Discourse on Causation*. It is the longest and
    most complex discourse on dependent origination in early Buddhism.

[^162]: The Kurukṣetra was an ancient Brahmanical kingdom
    situated in the region around modern Delhi, bordered by the Ganges
    in the east, the Sarasvatī in the west, the Himalayas
    in the north, and the hills of the Aravalli Range in the south. The
    Mahābharata climaxes with the battle fought there
    between the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas. These events, to
    the extent that they can be established historically, took place
    several centuries before the Buddha. Kuru marks the north-western
    extent of the Buddha's travels. Kammāsadamma is
    identified with modern Kumashpur in Haryana, about 40 km north of
    Delhi.

[^163]: While we cannot date this text, the fact that Ānanda has
    evidently been studying deep matters for a long time, that it takes
    place outside the Buddha's accustomed locales, and that it builds on
    teachings found elsewhere, suggests that it happened rather late in
    the Buddha's life. At [SN
    12.60](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.60/en/sujato) we find the same
    introduction to a much shorter discourse.

[^164]: At [SN 6.1:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.1/en/sujato#1.6)
    (and [DN 14:3.1.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#3.1.6) in
    the case of Vipassī), the Buddha hesitated to teach the
    Dhamma because dependent origination is so hard to see. Ānanda was
    not only learned and wise, he was a stream enterer who had directly
    experienced dependent origination ([AN
    10.92:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/an10.92/en/sujato#6.1)), yet he
    still underestimates it.

[^165]: The sutta introduce subtle variations in the standard formula as
    a means to illuminate hidden implications and dimensions.

[^166]: The Buddha establishes the primary purpose of dependent
    origination: to understand transmigration so as to be free from it.

[^167]: Dependent origination is here taught in "reverse order"
    (*paṭiloma*, [Ud
    1.2:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.2/en/sujato#1.4)), starting
    with the existential problem: we are all going to die. This factor
    and the next are resultant, so we cannot solve them directly.

[^168]: With this the Buddha denies the promise of immortality in this
    or any other realm.

[^169]: "Continued existence" (or "life") is an encompassing term,
    including both resultant and causal dimensions.

[^170]: "Grasping" and "craving" (together with "ignorance" in the full
    sequence) are the defilements that drive the process on. It is here
    that the practice of the path takes effect, uprooting them entirely.

[^171]: The next three factors spell out the process of sense experience
    that unfolds automatically. Meditation slows it down so it can be
    seen clearly, but the process remains even for the perfected ones.

[^172]: Here we encounter the first unique feature of this sequence, as
    normally the six sense fields appear as the condition for contact.
    The reason for this special presentation becomes clear later on.

[^173]: The mutual conditioning of consciousness with name and form is a
    further subtlety of this presentation. We have met this idea before
    in [DN 14:2.18.43](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#2.18.43);
    it also occurs in [SN
    12.65](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.65/en/sujato) and [SN
    12.67](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.67/en/sujato). Again,
    implications of this are explored below.

[^174]: The sequence is recapped in forward order (*anuloma*, [Ud
    1.1:1.4](https://suttacentral.net/ud1.1/en/sujato#1.4)).

[^175]: The Buddha now takes up each of the terms in more depth.

[^176]: This emphatic phrasing drives home that "cessation" (*nirodha*)
    is not simply temporary suppression or non-arising, but permanent
    and complete absence.

[^177]: "Rebirth" (*jāti*) is defined as the birth of a new
    life, not as simple arising.

[^178]: The various terms for "cause" are used as synonyms (*hetu*,
    *nidāna*, *samudaya*, *paccaya*). The purpose of using
    different terms is not to add nuances, but to reinforce the central
    meaning and guard against the corruption of meaning; if one word is
    lost or misunderstood, the meaning of the sentence as a whole is not
    changed.

[^179]: These realms relate to the kamma that projects consciousness
    into them. The realms of "luminous form" (*rūpabhava*)
    and the "formless" (*arūpabhava*) are generated by the
    form and formless attainments respectively. Any other kamma, good or
    bad, pertains to the sensual realm (*kāmabhava*). All
    rebirth takes place in one or other of these realms.

[^180]: "Grasping" (*upādāna*) begins with the primal
    desire of the senses, but the three other graspings are rather
    intellectual and sophisticated. Only a grown human being with a
    developed linguistic ability is able to formulate a view to become
    attached to, and likewise with attachment to religious observances
    and vows, and to theories of a self. This is why the bulk of kamma
    is produced by adult humans, rather than by, say, animals or
    children, for whom these dimensions of grasping are nascent.

[^181]: "Craving" (*taṇhā*) is a fundamental desire or
    urge. Unlike grasping, it is fully active in children and animals.
    Often it has a threefold definition, which we find below, but in
    dependent origination it is usually defined in terms of the six
    senses, which relates it to the items to come.

[^182]: The usual threefold definition of feeling (pleasant, painful,
    neutral) is reframed in terms of the six senses.

[^183]: Here the Buddha introduces another, even more radical, departure
    from the typical sequence. Rather than continue back to contact and
    name and form, he branches out in an entirely new direction. These
    "nine things rooted in craving" are found independently at [AN
    9.23:1.2](https://suttacentral.net/an9.23/en/sujato#1.2) and [DN
    34:2.2.31](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.2.31), but only
    here are they integrated with the standard dependent origination.

[^184]: While the purpose of the main dependent origination is to
    disclose the web of conditions that generates the suffering of
    transmigration, here the Buddha looks at the arising of social
    conflict and disorder.

[^185]: In [DN 27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato)
    Aggaññasutta the Buddha narrates a legend showing how
    these things arise. The point is not that we should not safeguard
    (*ārakkha*) our possessions. It is, rather, that so
    long as we live in a world where safeguarding possessions is
    necessary, there will be conflict and violence.

[^186]: "Stinginess" is *macchariya*.

[^187]: There are many words in Pali that approximate the English word
    "attachment". Here it is *ajjhosāna*.

[^188]: "Evaluation" is *vinicchaya*. We like to weigh up and consider
    the pros and cons of different objects of desire.

[^189]: Those who have nothing are grateful for any small thing, and do
    not indulge in picking and choosing.

[^190]: Our senses are tuned to hunt out and acquire pleasure.

[^191]: This is the normal definition of craving in the four noble
    truths, supplementing the previous definition in terms of the six
    senses. Both are included in this sutta to show that they do not
    contradict, but rather reveal different aspects of the same thing.
    It is not just sensual desire that drives acquisition. For example,
    religious people fight over sacred ground or holy objects to gain a
    place in heaven; or else those driven by nihilism go to any lengths
    for alcohol or drugs to erase existence.

[^192]: The threefold analysis of feeling leads to the process of
    acquisition, while the sixfold analysis of feeling leads to
    dependent origination.

[^193]: And now we rejoin the main sequence.

[^194]: People mostly want to enjoy pleasant sensations, in this life
    and the next, but those sensations depend on a constant supply of
    the appropriate stimuli.

[^195]: Name and form are said to be conditions for contact also at [Snp
    4.11:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#11.1).

[^196]: The "set of mental phenomena known as name" is
    *nāmakāya*. Its function depends not any underlying
    essence, but on the "features" by which it is "made known"; this is
    a phenomenological analysis. \| "Labeling contact" is
    *adhivacanasamphassa*; it is the active process by which the mind
    makes sense of the world by attaching labels to experience. This
    passage reinforces the linguistic significance of
    *nāma*.

[^197]: The "set of physical phenomena known as form" is
    *rūpakāya*. \| "Impingement contact" is
    *paṭighasamphassa*. Here *paṭigha* refers
    to the "striking" of physical phenomena against each other, such as
    light "hitting" the eye. It most commonly appears in this sense in
    the formula that begins the formless attainments.

[^198]: Labeling moves from the mind to the world; impingement moves
    from the world to the mind. Together they create a dynamic two-way
    process by which we learn about the world and how to make sense of
    it.

[^199]: Contact is fundamentally a meeting, normally expressed as the
    coming together of the sense stimulus (light), the sense organ
    (eye), and sense consciousness. By skipping the direct mention of
    the six senses, the Buddha opens another perspective on this
    process: mental labeling meets sense impingement, each essential to
    the other, and together making contact possible. The analysis itself
    exemplifies this process, as it starts by looking at the process
    from each side, and moves towards integration, seeing them both
    together.

[^200]: Consciousness in dependent origination is normally defined as
    the six kinds of sense consciousness ([SN
    12:6.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn12/en/sujato#6.3)). The purpose
    of this is to emphasize that the process of rebirth and
    transmigration is an empirical process, which depends on the same
    ordinary consciousness we are experiencing now. Here, once again, by
    skipping the six senses, a new mode of analysis opens up, which
    emphasizes the organic growth of the individual.

[^201]: "Conceived" is *okkamissatha*, literally "descend" or "arrive".
    \| "Coagulate" assumes the PTS reading *samucchissatha* (Sanskrit
    *sammurch*). I believe this echoes the belief that the embryo is
    "coagulated" from the mix of blood and semen. \| Linguistically,
    this passage through to [DN
    15:22.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#22.2) is marked
    with the extremely rare verbal ending *-issatha*, which is the
    middle form of the third person singular conditional.

[^202]: "Miscarried" is *vokkamissatha*. \| "State of existence" is
    *itthattā*, which is most commonly found in the
    declaration of the arahant that they will no longer be reborn into
    "this state of existence". \| Here "born" is *abhinibbatti*, which
    is listed along with *jāti*, *okkanti*, and other terms
    as a synonym in the standard definition of rebirth ([SN
    12.2:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.2/en/sujato#4.2), [MN
    9:24--26.7](https://suttacentral.net/mn9/en/sujato#24-26.7), [DN
    22:18.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn22/en/sujato#18.4)).

[^203]: The connection between dependent origination and childhood
    development is further explored in [MN
    38:28.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn38/en/sujato#28.1).

[^204]: Now we turn to the mirror side of the pair of conditions.

[^205]: Just as name and form---the organic, sensual, and sense-making
    body---cannot grow without consciousness, so too consciousness must
    acquire a landing or grounding place to be "planted" in name and
    form. \| *Dukkhasamudayasambhavo* ("the coming to be of the origin
    of suffering") might be rendered "the coming to be and origin of
    suffering". However, *dukkhasamudaya* occurs some hundreds of times
    in the sense "origin of suffering" so I take it in the same way
    here. This is supported by the PTS variant reading *dukkhasamudayo
    sambhavo*.

[^206]: This passage continues to employ rare middle forms, this time
    *-etha*, the third person singular optative.

[^207]: This passage explains why the sequence ends here rather than
    proceeding in the usual way to choices and ignorance. Any state of
    being ultimately depends on the codependency of name and form with
    consciousness. Within this key relationship is the extent not only
    of language, but also of wisdom, and the secret to the undoing of
    transmigration itself. One of the many profound implications of this
    is that there is no such thing as a state of pure consciousness
    independent of concepts. \| *Ettāvatā
    vaṭṭaṁ vattati itthattaṁ
    paññāpanāya* should be read with such passages as [SN
    22.56:5.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.56/en/sujato#5.3): *ye
    kevalino vaṭṭaṁ tesaṁ natthi
    paññāpanāya* ("For consummate ones, there is no cycle
    of rebirths to be found"). \| The Mahāsaṅgīti reading
    *aññamaññapaccayatā pavattati* is spurious, since it
    inserts an Abhidhamma concept from the commentary.

[^208]: The text now turns to an analysis of theories of "self"
    (*attā*), which is comparable to some of the passages
    of [DN 1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato). The Buddha began
    his discourse by stating that it is the failure to understand
    dependent origination that keeps beings trapped in transmigration.
    Dependent origination explains transmigration in a purely empirical
    way by inferring from the mental and physical phenomena we
    experience here and now. Self theorists, on the other hand, explain
    transmigration by introducing a new metaphysical principle, the
    "self" or "soul", by which they assume that the individual has an
    eternal underlying essence.

[^209]: "Formed" is *rūpī* ("possessing form"), identifying
    the self with the first of the five aggregates. If something were
    really the core essence of a person, you would think it is readily
    knowable. But the Buddha shows that theorists describe the self in
    multiple different and incompatible ways. Each of these draws on
    some more-or-less arbitrary aspect of empirical reality, such as
    "form", to describe an unknowable metaphysical entity that is in
    fact just pure supposition.

[^210]: An example of a self that is "physical and limited" would be the
    body.

[^211]: Such as the cosmos.

[^212]: Perhaps this is the self of "limited perception" ([DN
    1:2.38.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.38.13)). This
    would be where the mind is aware of something limited, and the self
    is identified with the mental dimension of that awareness.

[^213]: Such as the formless dimensions.

[^214]: The three options ("it is", "it will be so", and "I will make it
    be so") illustrate how the theorist resorts to ever more convoluted
    means to justify the lack of empirical support for their pet theory.
    \| *Bhāviṁ* ("sure to become") is the root
    *bhū* with the primary affix *-ī*, which
    connotes an inevitable future state. \| *Tattha* ("in some other
    place", literally "there") is explained by the commentary as
    *paraloke* ("in the next world").

[^215]: Their surface differences rest on the same underlying
    assumption, so if the assumption is disproved there is no need to
    refute each individual theory. \| *Iccālaṁ* resolves to
    *iti alaṁ*.

[^216]: This is the Buddha, who does not theorize a metaphysical self.
    Implicit in this argument is Occam's razor, "entities must not be
    multiplied beyond necessity". Since the self theorists want to prove
    the existence of the "self", it is up to them to supply the grounds
    to support their suppositions. Since they fail to do so, the
    rational position is that there is no self. The Buddha is not under
    a similar obligation to prove the non-existence of the "self", since
    it is reasonable to assume that things do not exist until the
    evidence says otherwise.

[^217]: Having asserted a metaphysical "self", the theorists go on to
    make certain observations and interpretations regarding it.

[^218]: The Buddha moves from theories of the self as form to feeling,
    the second of the five aggregates.

[^219]: For example, identifying the self with the supposed eternal
    bliss of heaven. As with the description of self in physical terms,
    the theorist proceeds from a simple assertion of identity to more
    complicated hypotheses.

[^220]: This is the inverse of the previous. The self is still defined
    *in relation to* feeling, but it is a negative relation. Such
    theories are commonly found in the Upaniṣads, where a
    prominent thread of analysis systematically rejects all the things
    that are *not* the self (*neti*), before finally arriving at what
    *is* the self (eg. Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad
    4.5.15).

[^221]: Here the theorist describes feeling as a function of the self:
    it is not what the self *is*, but what the self *does*. At [MN
    38:5.11](https://suttacentral.net/mn38/en/sujato#5.11) (= [MN
    2:8.8](https://suttacentral.net/mn2/en/sujato#8.8)),
    Sāti describes the self as consciousness, "the speaker
    and feeler who experiences the results of good and bad deeds in all
    the different realms".

[^222]: The Buddha goes on to develop specific arguments addressing each
    position.

[^223]: The Buddha points out the universal experience of feeling, thus
    establishing his argument on common ground. This same argument is
    found at [MN 74:10.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn74/en/sujato#10.1).

[^224]: The idea that only one kind of feeling can be experienced at a
    time became an adage of Buddhist psychology, but it is not obvious
    to me that it is the case. Here and at MN 74 it is assumed to be a
    shared belief with non-Buddhists.

[^225]: Feeling is part of the fundamental structure of consciousness.
    This argument comes through more clearly in Pali, for the word for
    "feeling" (*vedanā*) is derived from and still lies
    close to the sense of "knowing, experiencing". Thus the question is,
    "If there was no mind, would there be the thought 'I am this'?" The
    commentary explains that this refers to the bare material realm
    which is devoid of consciousness. The commentary appears to support
    the variant reading *ahamasmī* here. This makes sense
    in context, for "I am" is the first and most primordial assertion of
    a self, while "I am this" is a more sophisticated identification of
    the self in relation to the aggregates.

[^226]: The theorist avoids identifying feeling as the self, but they
    must identify *something* as the self (as for example,
    Sāti said the self was *viññāṇa*).
    Feeling, however, is deeply wound into the structure of
    consciousness, so if feeling were to be utterly absent, no other
    mental phenomena could continue, and there would therefore be no
    possibility of forming a theory of self.

[^227]: Letting go is not just a conceptual matter, it has immediate
    emotional consequences. *Paritassati* conveys the twin senses of
    desire and agitation, for which "anxiety" seems the best fit.

[^228]: This recalls the similar statement at [DN
    15:22.6](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#22.6). Whereas
    there it was a statement about name and form with consciousness,
    here it is a description of the arahant who has fully realized it.
    Unlike the theorists whose views do not withstand empirical
    scrutiny, the arahant's liberation is based on a direct
    understanding of reality.

[^229]: The Buddha returns once more to the question of rebirth,
    describing various states of rebirth in terms of consciousness. The
    seven planes are also mentioned at [DN
    33:2.3.28](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#2.3.28), [DN
    34:1.8.11](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#1.8.11), and [AN
    7.44:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/an7.44/en/sujato#1.1).

[^230]: "Plane of consciousness" is *viññāṇaṭṭhiti*, which
    could also be rendered "station".

[^231]: In the first of these dimensions there is no consciousness at
    all, and in the second there is no consciousness in the normal
    sense, which is why they cannot be called "planes of consciousness".

[^232]: *Abhinandituṁ*, to "take pleasure in", to "relish",
    or to "delight in" appears in the standard formula for the second
    noble truth, where craving "takes pleasure in various realms"
    (*tatratatrābhinandinī*).

[^233]: One "freed by wisdom" has wisdom as the dominant faculty.

[^234]: The eight liberations (*vimokkhā*) are an
    alternative way of describing the meditative experiences of
    *jhāna*. Elsewhere they are listed at [DN
    16:3.33.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#3.33.1), [DN
    33:3.1.168](https://suttacentral.net/dn33/en/sujato#3.1.168), [DN
    34:2.1.191](https://suttacentral.net/dn34/en/sujato#2.1.191),
    [AN:8.66](https://suttacentral.net/an/en/sujato#8.66), [MN
    77:22.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn77/en/sujato#22.1), and referred
    to at [AN 4.189:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/an4.189/en/sujato#1.8)
    and [Thag
    20.1:33.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag20.1/en/sujato#33.1). At [AN
    8.120](https://suttacentral.net/an8.120/en/sujato) and [MN
    137:27.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn137/en/sujato#27.1) they are
    listed but not called the eight liberations.

[^235]: Someone sees a meditative vision based on the perception of
    their own body, such as through mindfulness of breathing or one's
    own body parts. The first three liberations all cover the four
    *jhānas*.

[^236]: A meditator grounds their practice on some external focus, such
    as a light, the sight of a corpse, or an external element such as
    earth.

[^237]: This is a practice based on wholly pure and exalted meditation,
    such as the meditation on love, or the sight of a pure brilliant
    color like the sky.

[^238]: The "cessation of perception and feeling"
    (*saññāvedayitanirodha*) is a culminating meditation
    state of supreme subtlety that often leads directly to awakening
    (but see [AN 5.166](https://suttacentral.net/an5.166/en/sujato)).
    The state itself, like all meditation states, is temporary, but
    afterwards the defilements can be eliminated forever. This
    liberating insight is the consequence of the balanced development of
    all eight factors of the path.

[^239]: This passage emphasizes that this person is fully adept and has
    mastered all the states of meditation. The Buddha claimed such
    mastery ([AN
    9.41:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/an9.41/en/sujato#16.1)), and
    retained the ability even on his deathbed ([DN
    16:6.8.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#6.8.1)).

[^240]: Here we see the terms "one who is freed" used in two ways. All
    arahants have "freedom of heart" (by means of
    *samādhi*) and "freedom by wisdom" (the realization of
    the Dhamma). At the same time, one who emphasizes
    *samādhi* is said to have "freedom of heart" in
    contrast with one who emphasizes wisdom, who has "freedom by
    wisdom". One who has consummate mastery of both
    *samādhi* and wisdom is said to be "freed both ways".

