[^684]: This discourse gives an extensive account of divine beings. Some
    are familiar from elsewhere in the Pali texts, others found in
    various Brahmanical sources, while still others occur only here. For
    the names we can compare the edition of the Sanskrit text by
    Waldschmidt and Sander and available on SuttaCentral as [SF
    140](https://suttacentral.net/sf140/san/waldschmidt-sander).

[^685]: The Pure Abodes are inhabited entirely by non-returners.

[^686]: "Great congregation" is *mahāsamaya*.

[^687]: A village ([Bu Pj
    2:3.8](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj2/en/sujato#3.8)) or
    royal compound ([Bu Pc
    83:1.3.56.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc83/en/brahmali#1.3.56.1))
    was marked with a "boundary post" (*indakhīla*). It
    symbolized a fixed and immovable point, either in a good sense ([SN
    56.39:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.39/en/sujato#4.1)) or, as
    here, an obstacle. \| For Mahāsaṅgīti's
    *ūhacca manejā* read
    *ūhacca-m-anejā*.

[^688]: *Nāga* can refer to a class of semi-divine beings
    in a powerful serpentine form ("dragon"); a large and powerful
    snake, especially a king cobra; a bull elephant; or any powerful and
    mighty being ("giant").

[^689]: The discourse up to here is also found at [SN
    1.37](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.37/en/sujato).

[^690]: This recalls [DN
    14:1.10.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.10.1), where
    the relative sizes of the mendicant congregations of different
    Buddhas are tallied. That sutta, in another point of similarity,
    also featured a conversation with deities of the Pure Abodes.

[^691]: "Paean of praise" is *siloka*, a rare case where this means
    "verse (of praise)" rather than "fame, renown". \|
    *Anukassāmi* is present tense from the root *kass*, "to
    draw (up), to drag". Compare Sanskrit *anukarṣa* in the
    sense "invoking, summoning by incantation".

[^692]: This gives a hint as to one of the purposes of this sutta.
    Living alone in remote forests can be terrifying. Such places were
    widely believed to be haunted by all manner of supernatural
    creatures, not all of them friendly. While for an arahant this posed
    no threat, there would have been then, as there are today, many
    young or aspiring meditators who faced such challenges with
    trepidation. These verses offer succor, surrounding them with
    powerful, albeit invisible, allies.

[^693]: "Spirit" is *yakkha*. In later legend they appear as monstrous
    figures, but in the suttas they are ambiguous and may often be
    friendly to the Dhamma. Early statues of *yakkhas* at
    Madhurā (circa 100 BCE) depict noble and powerful
    kings, not ogres. *Yakkha* is also sometimes used more generally in
    the sense of an individual or deity.

[^694]: Colorful like the nymphs of [MN
    50:25.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#25.6) or
    Susīma's gods at [SN
    2.29:7.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.29/en/sujato#7.1).

[^695]: Mount Sātā is unidentified, but according to the
    commentary it was in the middle region.

[^696]: Vessāmitta ("friend of all") is the name of a Vedic
    hermit. Legend has it that he was a *khattiya* who earned
    brahminhood due to his intense austerities in the remote Himalayas.
    Perhaps this is a mountain named for him, although I can find no
    trace of it in Sanskrit.

[^697]: *Kumbhīra* means "crocodile".

[^698]: We met two human King Dhataraṭṭhas ("Strongrealm")
    in the Mahāgovindasutta.

[^699]: "Centaur" is *gandhabba*. *Gandhabbas* are wild, sexual beings
    who, being first to yoke the horse (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa
    5.1.4.8) and riding the steed called "Racer" (*vājin*,
    10.6.4.1), "take the reins" from Indra (Rig Veda 1.163.2) as his
    charioteer Mātali. It is likely the Sanskrit
    *gandharva* stems from the same root as the Greek *kentauro*, and
    the ultimate origin of the idea comes from the proto-Indo-Europeans,
    who rode the horse, creating a potent entity that was invincible in
    battle.

[^700]: By implication, they are renowned as being powerful as Indra,
    the king of gods who in Pali is more commonly called Sakka. It is
    also a nod to the multiplicity of divinities in the Vedic system,
    where one becomes many and many become one.

[^701]: *Virūḷhaka* is "growth"; he was probably a god of
    the fertile crops. In the Pali it is spelled Virūḷha
    here due to the meter.

[^702]: "Goblins" is *kumbhaṇḍa*, a race of lesser deities
    often depicted as ugly and misshapen. On the face of it,
    *kumbhaṇḍa* means "potballs", i.e. deities whose
    testicles are as big as pots. Perhaps more likely they are related
    to the beings known as *kuṣmāṇḍa* in Sanskrit, whose
    bellies are round as "pumpkins".

[^703]: One of the "royal snake families" at [AN
    4.67:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/an4.67/en/sujato#3.2). His name
    means "multiple eyes" (*virūpa-akkha*) for the false
    eyes on a cobra's hood.

[^704]: Also known as Vessavaṇa ([DN
    32:7.43](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#7.43), [Snp
    2.14:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.14/en/sujato#6.1)), which
    means "Son of the Renowned" from his father Viśrava.
    These two names appear together elsewhere in contemporary literature
    (Atharvaveda 8,10.28c, Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 13.4.3.10),
    where, although the passages are obscure, he appears to be
    associated with wickedness, concealment, and theft. Although a god
    of wealth (*dhanada*), the name Kuvera is explained by
    lexicographers as "deformed". Probably he was originally a god of
    the underground, blessed with the earth's riches, yet deformed by
    its great pressure.

[^705]: The following verses are a treasure-trove of ancient Indian
    mythology, recording the names of deities otherwise lost to history.
    Many of the names are obscure and variant readings are recorded in
    manuscripts and noted in the commentary. My spellings follow
    Ānandajoti's translation, *[The Discourse on the Great
    Convention](https://suttacentral.nethttp://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-Translations/Safeguard/02x-Atirekani-Sattasuttani-23.htm)*,
    unless there is a reason to change. I try to identify the deities as
    best as I can, but many of them remain speculative.

[^706]: These deities are called *dāsa*, which normally
    means "slave" in Pali. But here, it seems, we have a singular
    instance of the old Vedic meaning, an uncivilized foe. The
    *dāsas* Vṛtra, Namuci, and
    Vṛṣaśipra are described as "deceivers"
    (*māyin*, Rig Veda 1.53.7; 2.11.10; 7.99.4; 10.73.7).
    This epithet is also used of the closely related *dasyu* (Rig Veda
    1.33.10; 4.16.9; 8.14.14; 10.73.5; see note on [DN
    5:11.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#11.5)). Such beings
    are said to be "godless" since they oppose the Vedic deities (Rig
    Veda 2.19.7; 3.31.19; 7.1.10; 10.11.6; 10.138.4, etc.), so we can
    translate as "heathen".

[^707]: I am not able to identify any of these names with confidence,
    but perhaps *kuṭeṇḍu* and *viṭeṇḍu* could
    be traced to *indu* ("moon"), thus "crooked moon" and "defective
    moon". Compare *khaṇḍendu*, a later term for Śiva as
    the crescent moon.

[^708]: The Sanskrit names are *kiṭi*,
    *vikiṭi*, *bhṛgu*, and
    *bhṛkuṭi*. Only *bhṛgu* is attested in the
    Vedas, but he was a sage, not a "crafty heathen".

[^709]: Candana appears in [MN
    134:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn134/en/sujato#6.4) and [SN
    40.11:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn40.11/en/sujato#1.1), and
    together with Kāmaseṭṭha in [DN
    32:10.4](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#10.4). *Candana*
    means "sandalwood", although the name of the god might also relate
    to its root "shining". \| *Kāmaseṭṭha* means "Chief of
    Sex", i.e. "Eros"; he does not seem to appear in a Brahmanical
    context.

[^710]: Panāda ("roarer") was the name of an ancient king
    who performed the horse sacrifice ([Thag
    2.22:1.1](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.22/en/sujato#1.1), [DN
    26:26.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn26/en/sujato#26.1)). In [Ja
    265](https://suttacentral.net/ja265/en/sujato) he is said to have
    been the son of Vessavaṇa (Kuvera). \|
    Opamañña is a descendant of the ascended sage Upamanyu
    ("zealous one"; see note on [MN
    99:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn99/en/sujato#10.3)).

[^711]: Mātali is the charioteer of Sakka (i.e. Indra; [SN
    11.6:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.6/en/sujato#1.5), [MN
    83:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn83/en/sujato#14.1), etc.), a
    role he plays throughout Brahmanical literature as well. He appears
    here as one of the centaur lords, and is father to the centaur
    Sikhaṇḍī, Pañcasikha's rival in love [DN
    21:1.6.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.6.8).

[^712]: The *gandharva* Citrasena ("Brightspear") appears in the
    Sanskrit Purāṇas as a friend of Arjuna in various
    adventures.

[^713]: *Nala* means "reed". There was a King Nala of Vidarbha whose
    love for his Queen Damayantī is celebrated in the
    Mahābharata. \| Janesabha is an alternate spelling of
    Janavasabha ([DN 18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato)).

[^714]: In [DN 21](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato) we shall
    learn of how the centaur Pañcasikha ("Fivecrest") wooed
    Timbaru's daughter Suriyavaccasā ("Sunshine").

[^715]: Read *nābhasa*, which means "celestial, heavenly".
    The commentary says this was the name of a lake, which agrees with
    the legend that a Nābhasa was a son of Nala ("reed")
    and father of Puṇḍarīka ("lotus"). The Sanskrit here,
    however, has *sahabhuṁ nāgo*.

[^716]: *Vesālā* is from the adjectival form
    *vesāla* ("of Vesālī"). \| Pali *taccha*
    can represent Sanskrit *takṣa*, and the Sanskrit does
    indeed have *takṣakaḥ* here, so Tacchaka is probably
    "of Takṣasilā". This famous city, normally spelled
    Takkasilā in Pali, is Taxila in West Pakistan, an
    ancient center of learning.

[^717]: These *nāgas* are frequently mentioned together in
    Sanskrit literature such as the Mahābhārata (1.31.1a,
    2.9.9a, 5.101.9c), where they are also said to come from
    Pāyāga (3.83.72a: *prayāgaṁ
    sapratiṣṭhānaṁ kambalāśvatarau*).

[^718]: Payāga (modern Prayagraj, formerly Allahabad) is
    the sacred ford at the confluence of the Ganges and the
    Yamunā beside Kosambī (see [Bu Pj
    1:4.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#4.18)).

[^719]: The Dhataraṭṭha and Erāvaṇa
    *nāgas* also appear frequently in Sanskrit literature,
    and often in association with other deities in our text as part of a
    loose cluster of divinities (eg. Harivamśa 3.112--117).
    Erāvaṇa also appears at [Snp
    2.14:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.14/en/sujato#5.1). Here he
    is a *nāga* as in "dragon", but later tradition saw him
    as a *nāga* as in "elephant", in which role he became
    the mighty mount of Indra/Sakka.

[^720]: Here we see the eternal mythic struggle between birds and
    snakes, the creatures of the sky and the underworld.

[^721]: Birds are called "twice-born", once from the mother, once from
    the egg. "Twice-born" is also an epithet of brahmins ([Thig
    15.1:31.3](https://suttacentral.net/thig15.1/en/sujato#31.3)).

[^722]: The *supaṇṇā* (Sanskrit *suparṇa*,
    "brightwing") or *garuḷā* (Sanskrit
    *garuḍā*, "devourer") is the great eagle, king of
    birds, and later the vehicle of Viṣṇu. He has been
    falsely compared with the loathsome harpy; but his golden wings,
    closeness to the sun, and role as bearer of the nectar of
    immortality show that he is the Indian phoenix, the golden eagle of
    the sun. Unlike the western phoenix, he is not said to combust
    himself and be reborn anew. However this motif is merely the surface
    expression of the sun's fiery immortality. As the brother of the
    Dawn (Aruṇa), his golden wings at sunset "devour" the
    sun, and he disappears only to be reborn the next day.

[^723]: The Buddha reconciles even such inveterate enemies. In the
    Buddhist view, all of these beings have their place in the great
    pattern of nature.

[^724]: *Vajirahattha* ("thunderbolt-in-hand") is a synonym of
    *vajirapāṇi* ([DN
    3:1.21.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato#1.21.3), [MN
    35:14.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn35/en/sujato#14.1)). It is a
    frequent epithet of Sakka in the Vedas (eg. Rig Veda 1.173.10a
    *indro vajrahastaḥ*), an identification confirmed by the commentary
    here.

[^725]: Vāsava is another epithet of Sakka (see below, [DN
    20:14.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#14.9)), meaning
    "endowed with wealth" (*vasu*; see for example Rig Veda 1.9.9a
    *indraṁ vasupatiṁ* "Indra, lord of
    wealth"). The Buddhist explanation of his name [SN
    11.13:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.13/en/sujato#9.1), rather,
    plays on the word *āvasatha* and calls him the "giver
    of a guesthouse". Later Brahmanical texts enumerated eight Vasus,
    with Indra as their lord, who are reckoned among the thirty-three.
    \| Sakka's wife is the demon (*asura*) princess Sujā,
    daughter of Vepacitti, hence they are his "brothers", technically
    in-laws ([SN
    11.12:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.12/en/sujato#6.1)).

[^726]: The Kālakañja ("Blue-lotus") is said to be the
    lowest class of demons ([DN
    24:1.7.19](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#1.7.19)).

[^727]: The Dānavas are a prominent group of *asuras*
    otherwise unattested in early Pali. The name stems from "rivers,
    waters" after their mother Danū. \| Ghasa ("devourer")
    is occasionally mentioned as the name of a *rakṣasa*
    (Rāmāyaṇa 5.22.36a *praghasā
    nāma rākṣasī*). The commentary treats them
    as a single class of arrow-wielding *asuras*.

[^728]: Vepacitti means "wise thinker", Sucitti means "good thinker".
    Vepacitti was the lord of the *asuras* and Sakka's counterpart.
    Their relationship was complicated ([SN
    11.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.23/en/sujato)). Brahmanical
    literature regards him as the eldest son of Danū and
    hence chief of the Dānavas. The Sanskrit form is
    *vipracitti*, but in Buddhist texts it is incorrectly Sanskritized
    to *vemacitra*. Vepacitti's fame matches Sucitti's obscurity, for he
    does not seem to appear elsewhere.

[^729]: Pahārāda the ocean-loving *asura* lord appears in
    [AN 8.19](https://suttacentral.net/an8.19/en/sujato). His name
    (Sanskrit *prahlāda*) means "mirth". Later Brahmanical
    legends say he was a righteous son of the wicked
    Hiraṇyakaśipu, who hated him for his devotion to
    Viṣṇu. \| The story goes that when Namuci stole the
    soma from Indra, Indra's vengeance was frustrated by his vow not to
    harm him with anything wet or dry, in the dark or the light
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 12.7.3.1). Indra's ingenious
    solution was to dismember him with foam (Rig Veda 8.14.13) at dawn.
    Namuci's name is explained as *na-muci*, "not letting go" (the
    waters). In Buddhism, Namuci is a name of Māra,
    although here Māra appears separately below..

[^730]: According to legend, Bali was the grandson of
    Pahārāda and son of Virocana. His hundred sons were
    dread warriors (Bhāgavata Purāṇa 8.10.30).
    The word *bali* also refers to a kind of sacrificial offering, but
    the roots of the term are obscure.

[^731]: *Virocana* was their grandfather. He was another adversary of
    Indra, despite which they were both said to have sought knowledge
    from Prajāpatī, but Virocana misunderstood since he saw
    only the surface meaning (Chāndogya
    Upaniṣad 8.7.2--8.5). Here he is associated with
    Rāhu, while Gaṇeśa Purāṇa
    2.29 says he was granted a crown by the sun which he then lost.
    These details hint at a connection with the eclipse, in which case
    *virocana* would be the rays that emanate during a solar eclipse.

[^732]: Rāhu is the mighty *asura* who "seizes" the moon
    ([SN 2.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.9/en/sujato)) or the sun ([SN
    2.10](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.10/en/sujato)) to create an
    eclipse. He is the son of Vepacitti.

[^733]: These four are normally treated in the suttas as physical
    properties. Each of them is worshiped in the Rig Veda as a deity,
    and the Upanishads list them together along with other elements (eg.
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.4.5). I am not
    aware of any earlier contexts that group the four together
    systematically as deities in this way.

[^734]: Varuṇa is invoked frequently in the Vedas, and in
    the suttas he is associated with other leading deities such as Indra
    and Soma ([DN
    13:25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#25.2), [DN
    32:10.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#10.2), [SN
    11.3:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.3/en/sujato#5.1)). As one of
    the twelve children of Aditi he stood for a calendar month, and grew
    a wide and sometimes baffling array of associations---the oceans,
    water, the sky (at night), and justice. Vedic Varuṇa
    was the god of command, the king of tough rule. He was identified
    with the aristocrats, while his partner Mitra was the brahmins
    (Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 4.1.4).

[^735]: *Soma* is the divine nectar that filled the ancient
    proto-Indo-Europeans with vitality. Its biological identity is
    disputed, but may have been ephedra. It is associated with the moon,
    hence the connection with Varuṇa as the night sky. \|
    *Yasa* means "fame, glory"; so far as I know it is not personified
    in early Brahmanical texts, and rarely later. The connection between
    these two is illuminated by such passages as Rig Veda 7.85.3. To
    uphold Indra and Varuṇa in battle, there is an offering
    of Soma, which is described as *svayaśasaḥ*,
    "Self-Glorious", i.e. the state of being high on speed, if speed
    were a god.

[^736]: In the Vedas, Mitra ("friend") is almost always paired with
    Varuṇa, and the appearance of Mettā
    ("friendliness") here echoes that closeness. He was the god of
    alliances. \| *Karuṇā* in the sense of "compassion"
    does not occur at all in pre-Buddhist Sanskrit. It is probably
    introduced here as companion to Mettā by association
    with Mitra. The Sanskrit here, however, is *maitrī
    varuṇikā*. From a Buddhist point of view, these are
    deities reborn due to the development of *jhāna* based
    on love and compassion.

[^737]: Veṇhu (variant *veṇḍu*) is the Pali
    spelling of Sanskrit *viṣṇu*, who appears only here and
    at [SN 2.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.12/en/sujato). In the Rig
    Veda he was a solar god who made three great strides (said to
    encompass the earth, the sky, and the heavens). \| A deity named
    Sahalī ("with plow") appears at [SN
    2.30:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.30/en/sujato#3.1) where he
    praises Makkhali Gosāla, but I cannot trace him
    anywhere else.

[^738]: *Yama* often refers to a god who guards the paths to the land of
    the dead ([SN
    1.33:10.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.33/en/sujato#10.3), [MN
    130:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn130/en/sujato#5.1)), lord of the
    Yāma gods. Here, however, it refers to "twins" who in
    the Vedas are often identified with the Aśvins (the
    twin horses yoked to the chariot). In the Vedas, it seems *asama*
    ("unequalled") is used as an epithet only, although the commentary
    says it is a name. \| In Pali these lines lack a verb, while the
    Sanskrit supplies *āgataś* ("come") instead of
    *asamā*, so perhaps we should read "the pair of Twins
    came".

[^739]: Vāsava is above at [DN
    20:12.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#12.3).

[^740]: *Purandara* ("Fortbreaker") is another epithet of Sakka or Indra
    (eg. Rig Veda 1.102.7). The Buddha reforms it to *Purindada*
    ("Firstgiver") at [SN
    11.12:2.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn11.12/en/sujato#2.1). But
    Indra's generosity is long renowned, eg. Rig Veda 1.10.6c: "He is
    the able one, and he will be able for us---Indra who distributes the
    goods" (*sa śakra uta naḥ śakad indro vasu
    dayamānaḥ*).

[^741]: Sanskrit has *sabhikā*. Most of the deities in the
    following verses do not seem to be met with elsewhere. The Sanskrit
    forms are often quite different but equally untraceable.

[^742]: Their names might mean "Unhurt" and "Hurter". The Sanskrit
    implausibly has *romā* ("Romans").

[^743]: For Varuṇa see above ([DN
    20:13.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#13.3)). \|
    Sahadhamma means "who share the same duty".

[^744]: The "Unfallen" and the "Unshakeable".

[^745]: The Sūleyyas might be "spear (or trident) bearers";
    *śūli* is a name of Shiva. \| Rucira means "brilliant,
    beautiful".

[^746]: *Vāsavanesi* means "seekers of
    Vāsava".

[^747]: "Equals" and "Great Equals".

[^748]: "Humans" and "Superhumans", but here perhaps "Descendants of
    Manu".

[^749]: As per [DN
    1:2.7.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato#2.7.2).

[^750]: [DN 12.10.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn12.10.2/en/sujato).

[^751]: *Hari* means "yellow, green" and is the astrological color of
    the planet *budha* ("Mercury"). It came to have the general meaning
    of "sacred, holy" and was an epithet for various deities, which in
    the Rig Veda included Indra and Vishnu. However the astrological
    connection is suggested by the references to Mars and Venus below.

[^752]: "Dwellers in the Red Place (= planet)", i.e. "Martians".

[^753]: *Pāraga* means "one who has crossed over".

[^754]: The deities seem to represent the three main lights that
    announce a new day: the morning star, the newborn sun, and the aura
    of the dawn. \| *Sukka* ("Bright") is the name of the planet Venus,
    the morning star. \| *Aruṇa* is the dawn, a major Vedic
    deity signifying the arising of consciousness and order. \|
    *Karambha* means "porridge", which was offered to the sun under the
    name Pūṣan (Rig Veda 3.52.7, 6.56.1; Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 4.2.5.22; Kauṣītaki
    Brāhmaṇa 6.8.18; Maitrāyaṇī
    Saṁhitā 3.10.6). Hence he became known as
    *karambhād*, "porridge-eater". Apparently the sun lost
    its teeth and could only eat porridge (Śatapatha
    Brāhmaṇa 1.7.4.8). Being toothless like a baby, and
    lacking the risen sun's "teeth" (i.e. "rays"), he probably
    represents the "newborn sun". Compare for example Rig Veda 10.35,
    where Pūṣan is invoked, along with many other deities,
    in a hymn to the dawn.

[^755]: Mahāsaṅgīti has *veghanasā*, for which
    the Buddha Jayanthi variant *vekhanasa* is preferable. We meet a
    wanderer of that name in [MN
    80](https://suttacentral.net/mn80/en/sujato), and in Sanskrit
    *vaikhānasa* is a general term for ascetics; but this
    meaning seems unlikely in context. The astrologer
    Varāhamitra names it a constellation
    (Bṛhat-saṁhitā 47.62), but that is much
    later. The Sanskrit here is *nīlakavāsinī* ("Dwellers
    in the Blue"), which pairs well with *lohitavāsino*
    above. *Nīlavāsa* is a name for Saturn, whose color is
    blue.

[^756]: *Odātagayha* is probably "white planet", i.e. the
    sun. Sanskrit has *avadātakeśā* ("white-haired").
    Compare the description of solar gods Sūrya at Rig Veda
    1.50.8 as *śociṣkeśaṁ vicakṣaṇa*
    ("flame-haired, brilliant") and Varuṇa at Rig Veda
    8.41.9 as *śvetā vicakṣaṇā* ("white,
    brilliant").

[^757]: Sanskrit has *pītakavāsinī*, "dwellers in the
    yellow", either Mercury or Jupiter.

[^758]: The *sadāmatta* ("everdrunk") gods appear in some
    later Buddhist texts, alongside the *māyādharas* (or
    *mālādharas*), but they don't seem to appear in a Vedic
    context. \| I cannot find any reference to the
    *hāragaja* gods. Sanskrit has *hāritakā*,
    perhaps "sons of Harītī" (the *yakkhinī*;
    but see below, [DN
    20:20.12](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato#20.12)).

[^759]: "Assorted" is *missaka*, not elsewhere attested as a name of
    gods.

[^760]: Pajjuna (Sanskrit *parjanya*) is a Vedic god of thunderstorms
    closely associated with Indra/Sakka. His daughters appear in [SN
    1.39](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.39/en/sujato) and [SN
    1.40](https://suttacentral.net/sn1.40/en/sujato). Sanskrit has
    instead *śuddhakā rucikā* ("pure,
    bright").

[^761]: The gods of Tusita and Yama are normal parts of the Buddhist
    cosmology. Neither *khemiya* nor the Sanskrit *kṣemaka*
    appear to be the names of gods elsewhere, and the commentary
    explains that they dwell in both the Tusita and Yama realms.

[^762]: The commentary acknowledges the variant readings
    *kaṭṭhakā* (from "stick" or "plowed") and
    *kathakā* ("reciters"), while Sanskrit has
    *kṛṣṇuktāś* ("reciters of the black"). Perhaps related
    to Sanskrit *kāṭhaka*, a recension of the Black Yajur
    Veda taught by the sage Kaṭha.

[^763]: Perhaps from *lamba* ("hang, droop") in reference to deities of
    the sunset (cp. Mahābhārata 4.31.4c *sūrye
    vilambati*). Sanskrit has *lumbinī
    lumbinīśreṣṭhā*, which is perhaps normalized to mean
    "of Lumbinī".

[^764]: "Shining" (*joti*) is used widely of many gods, including the
    Sun and Indra. \| The commentary derives *āsavā* from
    *āsa* ("wish") not *āsava* ("defilement"),
    explaining that they achieved their status due to desire
    (*chandavasena*). This agrees with the Sanskrit
    *svāśiṣā* ("well-wish, prayer"), i.e. words of wishing
    or blessing uttered over the sacrifice (see Rig Veda 10.44.5; cp.
    8.44.23). This is a case where using the Pali in a translation would
    be actively misleading.

[^765]: *Pavuṭṭha* ("shed"), from *pavasati* ("stay away"),
    seems to be unique in the Pali in this sense. Commentary glosses
    *vigata*, "disappeared". \| The first part of this verse, according
    to the commentary, addresses the Saṅgha as a group in
    the singular, but I translate in plural for clarity.

[^766]: Subrahmā appears at [SN
    2.17](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.17/en/sujato) and [SN
    6.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.6/en/sujato). \| Paramatta appears
    only here in Pali. In Brahmanical texts it is a common term for the
    highest conception of Brahmā as the "supreme soul"
    (*paramātman*) of the cosmos. This term came into
    common usage later, but is found occasionally in earlier texts such
    as Maitrāyaṇī Saṁhitā 2.9.1.

[^767]: Sanaṅkumāra makes regular guest appearances in the
    suttas ([DN 3](https://suttacentral.net/dn3/en/sujato), [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato), [DN
    19](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato), [DN
    27](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato), [SN
    6.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn6.11/en/sujato), [AN
    11.10](https://suttacentral.net/an11.10/en/sujato)). \| Tissa is a
    common name, meaning "born under the star Sirius". Perhaps this is
    the former monk of that name who was reborn in the
    Brahmā realm ([AN
    6.34](https://suttacentral.net/an6.34/en/sujato)).

[^768]: The moniker "Great Brahmā"
    (*mahābrahmā*) is here used of an individual, but
    sometimes it is a class of leading Brahmās.

[^769]: "God Almighty" (*issara*) is a Brahmā god to whom
    the creation of the world is falsely attributed ([DN
    24:2.14.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn24/en/sujato#2.14.3), [MN
    101:22.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn101/en/sujato#22.5), [AN
    3.61:1.6](https://suttacentral.net/an3.61/en/sujato#1.6)).

[^770]: Sanskrit has *hāritī*, the name of the fabled
    *yakkhiṇī* of Madhurā converted by the
    Buddha.

