[^771]: This late sutta exhibits considerable literary sophistication.
    The A-plot concerns Sakka's rejection of his violent past and
    embrace of the Dhamma, while the B-plot concerns
    Pañcasikkha's more modest growth from a libertine to a
    married man. \| This discourse is quoted by name and a passage
    discussed at [SN 22.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.4/en/sujato).
    In addition, the dialogue at [MN
    37](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato) picks up directly where
    this leaves off and may be considered a sequel. A Sanskrit parallel
    published by Ernst Waldschmidt in 1979 is available on SuttaCentral
    as [SF 241](https://suttacentral.net/sf241/san/waldschmidt). A
    different discourse of the same name is found at [SN
    35.118](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.118/en/sujato).

[^772]: Rhys Davids follows the commentary in translating this "the cave
    of Indra's Sāl Tree". However the Sanskrit
    *yāvacchailaguhāyām* supports "hill cave".

[^773]: Introduced in a minor role in [DN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/dn18/en/sujato), [DN
    19](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato), and [DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato),
    Pañcasikha gets his moment to shine in this sutta.
    Outside of the Dīghanikāya, he appears only in [SN
    35.119](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.119/en/sujato). His name means
    "Fivecrest", evidently in reference to his impressive hairdo; a
    nymph or group of nymphs bore the synonymous name
    Pañcacūḍā, "Five Topknots". The centaur (*gandhabba*)
    was a wild rogue of music, dancing, and sex. He must be tamed, and
    here this is achieved through the power of love and filial respect.
    A less diplomatic approach is taken in Atharvaveda 4.37.7, where the
    *gandharva* with his "egg-crest" (*śikhaṇḍino*) is
    threatened with castration.

[^774]: The "arched harp" (*vīṇa*) was a multi-stringed
    instrument held in the lap, with the strings attached across a
    curved open arch or bow. It is not the modern Indian instrument
    called veena, which is a lute or stick zither. *Gandhabbas* are
    closely associated with music. Māra's harp is described
    in the same way ([SN
    4.23:10.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn4.23/en/sujato#10.7)), and
    tradition says they were in fact the same instrument.

[^775]: In the Buddhist hierarchy of divinity, *gandhabbas* occupy a
    more humble place than the gods of the thirty-three, yet here
    Pañcasikha appears with them in a position of honor. In
    [DN 19:28.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn19/en/sujato#28.3) we saw
    that the even more exalted Brahmā takes the form of
    Pañcasikha. This fluidity is characteristic of old
    Vedic cosmology, where there is no clear hierarchy of divinity. The
    formalized hierarchies in Buddhism and Hinduism are a later
    conception.

[^776]: We will learn later of how Sakka's appearance could be too
    disturbing for the Buddha while on retreat ([DN
    21:1.10.13](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.10.13)).
    Pañcasikha, on the other hand, would appear alone,
    without a retinue. Note, however, that on subsequent occasions Sakka
    showed no such reticence, either because he was already a
    stream-enterer or because the Buddha was not in solitary retreat.

[^777]: The idea that the Buddha would be wooed by a love song seems
    like an absurd conceit, until you take into account the centaurs'
    dangerous reputation as inveterate lechers. Pañcasikha
    wants to show that he is maturing and finally seeking a commitment
    in a respectable marriage.

[^778]: Suriyavaccasā ("Sunshine") accords with the Vedic
    conception of the wife as the Sun (Sūryā, Rig Veda
    10.85) who takes as husband Soma, the moon. She appears in
    Atharvaveda 8.10.27, which invokes the *gandharvas* with their
    female counterpart the "nymphs" (Pali *accharā*,
    Sanskrit *āpsarásā*).

[^779]: In Sanskrit literature, Timbaru (Sanskrit *tumburu*) was an
    elder *gandharva* musician in the courts of Indra and Kuvera.
    According to Rāmāyaṇa 3.4, he was cursed with a
    monstrous form by Kuvera due to an inappropriate lust for the nymph
    Rambhā. Upon his defeat at the hands of
    Rāma he was restored to his former status.
    Pañcasikha would have wanted to avoid a similar fate.
    Rather than Suriyavaccasā, the Sanskrit literature
    mentions his daughters Manuvantī and
    Sukeśī (Vāyupurāṇa 69.49 =
    Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa 2.7.13).

[^780]: *Aṅgīrasi* means "shining one" and is
    etymologically linked with *agni* ("fire").
    Suriyavaccasā earned the name due to both her radiant
    nature and her family connections: her father Timbaru was a son of
    Kaśyapa, who was (according to certain lineages)
    brother of Aṅgīras, from whom the
    Aṅgīrasas were descended. In the Arthavaveda---the only
    early non-Buddhist source for a nymph named
    Suriyavaccasā---*aṅgīrasi* is associated
    with witchcraft (Atharvaveda 12.5.52). *Aṅgīrasa* is
    also a patronymic of the Buddha ([DN
    32:3.14](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato#3.14)).

[^781]: "Saints" is *arahantā*, which I normally translate
    as "perfected ones".

[^782]: *Parinibbāpaya*, "please quench me".
    Pañcasikha subverts imagery employed by the
    Buddha---quenching thirst, cooling breezes, extinguished flames---to
    erotic effect.

[^783]: Pañcasikha is showing off his literary skill. The
    same image, the elephant, illustrates opposing qualities, peaceful
    and violent. In these two sides of sensual desire, he reveals,
    unconsciously perhaps, the rapacious side of his own nature. For
    Pañcasikha, the elephant bursting its bonds illustrates
    his crazed devotion, whereas later it illustrates breaking free of
    desire ([DN
    21:1.12.45](https://suttacentral.net/dn21/en/sujato#1.12.45)).

[^784]: For how a married couple may stay together in this life and the
    next, see [AN 4.55](https://suttacentral.net/an4.55/en/sujato).

[^785]: Pañcasikha is using the present participle
    *jigīsāno* in the historical present.

[^786]: In Indian culture, a *gandharva* wedding is a pure love-match,
    without the blessing of parents or priests. Here, however,
    Pañcasikha wants to do the right thing and get the
    father's blessing.

[^787]: If Pañcasikha was seeking the Buddha's approval for
    his love-match, he was doomed to disappointment, as the Buddha and
    his mendicants do not involve themselves in arranging marriages. The
    Buddha sidesteps the issue by politely complementing
    Pañcasikha on his musicianship.

[^788]: "When did you compose" is also at [MN
    56:30.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato#30.1).

[^789]: "Sister" (*bhaginī*) is a respectful term of
    address, but is normally used in a chaste sense. When
    Raṭṭhapāla calls his wives "sister", they faint in
    shock ([MN 82:23.4](https://suttacentral.net/mn82/en/sujato#23.4)).

[^790]: Sikhaṇḍī ("egg-crested") is the term for the
    centaur as seductive threat to women in Atharvaveda 4.37.7. It is
    also a poetic term for a peacock.

[^791]: It is rare for the Buddha to address a deity as "venerable"
    (*āyasmā*), a term usually reserved for monks.
    Moggallāna addresses Sakka as "the venerable Kosiya" at
    [MN 37:10.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#10.6);
    Mahākassapa calls him Kosiya without honorific at [Ud
    3.7:3.12](https://suttacentral.net/ud3.7/en/sujato#3.12). \| The
    word *kosiya* is explained by the commentaries as "owl", which, if
    correct, would have been the totem for a clan of that name. It is,
    however, a patronymic: Rig Veda 1.10.11 has *indra
    kauśika* which means "Indra, son of Kuśika
    (or Kuśa)". *Kuśa* grass is critical to
    the performance of Vedic rites, and the label probably initially
    implied "Brahmanized", i.e. a king whose reign was authorized
    according to Vedic ritual. Kosiya is said to be a low class family
    name ([Bu Pc
    2:2.1.18](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc2/en/sujato#2.1.18)).

[^792]: A *paricārikā* is a maid attending on a nymph ([MN
    37:8.12](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#8.12)). \|
    Bhūjati (variant *bhuñjatī*) does not seem
    to appear elsewhere.

[^793]: Sakka pointedly ignores this, but perhaps his shame at
    disturbing the Buddha's meditation explains his oblique method of
    gaining an audience.

[^794]: This implies she was a stream-enterer.

[^795]: In Buddhism, sex is mutable between lives and even within one
    life ([Bu Pj
    1:10.6.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pj1/en/sujato#10.6.1)).
    Later Buddhists sometimes held that the status of a male was
    preferable. Here this is not stated outright, but the narrative
    implies that she thought her station was improved when becoming a
    male. Notably, it is not the Buddha who says this, but Sakka,
    relaying the story of another deity. That the proponent was a woman,
    at least formerly, is a trope of Indian literature: a woman is the
    ideal misogynist (see eg. [Ja
    61](https://suttacentral.net/ja61/en/sujato) or
    Śivapurāna chapter 4). Here, though, the situation is
    nuanced, because despite her (presumed) inferior status, she has
    better rebirth than the monks she served.

[^796]: The realm of centaurs is "inferior" because the centaurs are
    known for their ribald sexuality.

[^797]: *Kutomukhā*, which occurs only in this sutta,
    contrasts with *sammukhā* ("in the presence of", "from
    the mouth of"). The commentary explains it as a rhetorical question,
    "Were you distracted or falling asleep?" Alternatively, it might
    mean "From whom did you learn the Buddha's teaching?" It recurs
    later in the verses. This is not the only such case:
    *duddiṭṭharūpaṁ* and *kāyaṁ
    brahmapurohitaṁ* are other examples of terms found
    nowhere else in the Pali canon, yet found here both in prose and in
    verse. Clearly one has been copied from the other; it seems to me
    that the rarity of these terms and the greater coherence of the
    verses suggests that the prose is a (somewhat altered) summary of
    the verses.

[^798]: The commentary explains the verb "gained"
    (*paṭilabhiṁsu*) as serving dual roles here: "gaining"
    of "absorption mindfulness" (*jhānasatiṁ*), upon which
    they "gain" rebirth in the Brahmā realm. However, the
    verses below speak of "recollecting" (*anussaraṁ*) the
    Buddha's teachings at this juncture. Compare [Bu NP
    23:1.1.20](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-np23/en/sujato#1.1.20),
    where the king "remembered" his long-forgotten promise
    (*vissaritvā cirena satiṁ
    paṭilabhitvā*). [AN
    4.191:2.24](https://suttacentral.net/an4.191/en/sujato#2.24) speaks
    of the "arising of memory" (*satuppādo*) in a deity
    when reminded of Dhamma passages they once recited as a monk. \| The
    phrase *kāyaṁ brahmapurohitaṁ* is
    syntactically incongruous; I think it was clumsily copied from the
    verses below, where the required verb (*ajjhagaṁsu*) is
    present. The commentary explains it as "a Minister of
    Brahmā's body" (*brahmapurohitasarīraṁ*),
    but in such contexts *kāya* usually means "host".

[^799]: When bowing, it is a special sign of devotion to touch the feet
    of the one revered (eg. [MN
    89:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn89/en/sujato#9.1)).

[^800]: Here Gopaka shifts from speaking about them in third person to
    speaking to them in second person.

[^801]: *Tidiva* is an abbreviated reference to the thirty-three gods.

[^802]: I.e. she was a lay person.

[^803]: Up until now, the verses have been spoken by Gopaka, but here a
    narrator appears.

[^804]: Normally rebirth is described as passing away in one realm then
    being reborn in another. Yet here the gods of the thirty-three---in
    their traditional abode on Mount Meru---were watching them literally
    fly from one realm to another.

[^805]: The truncated *janind'* is not vocative *janinda* for Sakka, but
    nominative *janindo* for the Buddha.

[^806]: "Sakyan Sage" (*sakyamuni*) became a favorite epithet of the
    Buddha, but in early texts it appears only here and the Ratanasutta
    ([Snp 2.1:4.2](https://suttacentral.net/snp2.1/en/sujato#4.2)).

[^807]: "Sons" in a spiritual sense.

[^808]: The commentary says, "In this dispensation the explanation of
    the teaching is such that because of it, disciples become endowed
    with such qualities" (*ettha sāsane
    evarūpā dhammappakāsanā, yāya
    sāvakā etehi guṇehi
    samannāgatā honti*). This explains the feminine
    *etādisī*; *pakasanā*, which is normally
    neuter, is feminine here. This use is fairly common in later texts
    (it occurs at the conclusion of the Ṭīkā for this
    sutta).

[^809]: *Kiṅkaṅkhati* is a unique term for "doubt".

[^810]: The end point of Gopaka's speech is hard to determine, as there
    is no *-ti* to mark it. Various editions and translations either
    ignore the issue or end it in different places. The next line marks
    the beginning of Sakka's direct speech to the Buddha, and I think it
    makes the best sense to assume that up to here he has been relating
    the story he was told.

[^811]: This question hints at Sakka's own evolution from the battlegod
    of the Vedas to an acolyte of peace.

[^812]: Jealousy is wanting what others have, while stinginess is not
    wanting to share what you have.

[^813]: Compare with such contexts as the side branch of dependent
    origination at [DN
    15:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn15/en/sujato#9.1), the origins of
    disputes at [Snp 4.11](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato),
    and the analysis of proliferation at [MN
    18](https://suttacentral.net/mn18/en/sujato). Note the constructive
    use of the "yes, and" method of questioning. Sakka finds wisdom due
    to his curiosity, neither being too-easily sated with a simple
    answer, nor quibbling that the answer is inadequate, but building on
    the foundations of understanding.

[^814]: Compare [Snp
    4.11:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#4.1).

[^815]: Here we depart from the normal sequence, which is that feelings
    give rise to craving (*taṇhā*). In [Snp
    4.11:6.1](https://suttacentral.net/snp4.11/en/sujato#6.1) it is said
    that pleasure and pain give rise to desire, not thought.

[^816]: "Judgments that emerge from the proliferation of perceptions"
    renders *papañcasaññāsaṅkhā*. Again the sequence
    departs from [MN
    18:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn18/en/sujato#16.1), which says
    that thoughts---which are normal and morally neutral psychological
    processes---give rise to "proliferation" (*papañca*),
    which is when craving and delusion cause thought to spin out of
    control. "Proliferation" then solidifies into "judgments" that fuel
    an individual's delusion of "self" persisting through time.

[^817]: *Jaññā* is 3rd singular optative (cp. [AN
    9.6:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/an9.6/en/sujato#3.4)).

[^818]: That is, second *jhāna* is better than first
    *jhāna*.

[^819]: Overwhelmingly, the suttas speak of happiness in the path to
    liberation. They do, however, also acknowledge that sometimes
    temporary states of sadness leading to disillusionment can spur a
    person on the path.

[^820]: It is hard to know what the text is getting at here, as there is
    no "sadness" in any *jhāna*.

[^821]: Here the Buddha emphasizes the psychological and spiritual
    underpinnings of the "monastic code" (*pātimokkha*).

[^822]: The suttas frequently describe three kinds of search: for
    sensual pleasures, for continued existence, and for a spiritual path
    (eg. [SN
    45.161:7.3](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.161/en/sujato#7.3)). The
    last search led the Buddha to awakening ([MN
    26:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn26/en/sujato#15.1)).

[^823]: Sakka switches his term of address for the Buddha from
    *mārisa* to the more respectful *bhante* here, then
    back to *mārisa* below. This passage is found at [MN
    114:24.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn114/en/sujato#24.5), where
    *bhante* is used, suggesting it was imported from there.

[^824]: For a more detailed analysis of this, see [MN
    152](https://suttacentral.net/mn152/en/sujato).

[^825]: The Pali *ekanta* ("single") here is a little tricky; it could
    mean either "the same" or "of one goal". The Sanskrit has just *eka*
    (*ekakāmā ekacchandāḥ*, "one desire, one
    wish"), while the commentary explains the first and last terms as
    "one goal" and the middle terms as "one".

[^826]: The Buddha points out that spiritual teachers, when faced with a
    world of experiential diversity, tend to prioritize their own
    experience or doctrine, dismissing others as less real or
    meaningful.

[^827]: This is the final substantive question of the series. It is
    picked up in [MN
    37:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/mn37/en/sujato#2.2) where Sakka, in
    a subsequent visit, inquires further as to the nature of those who
    have realized the ultimate goal.

[^828]: "Turbulence" is *ejā*, from a root meaning "motion,
    agitation", and hence the opposite of the "imperturbable" (*aneja*)
    peace of the Buddha ([SN
    35.90](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.90/en/sujato)).

[^829]: Compare Ajātasattu's experience at [DN
    2:15.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#15.1).

[^830]: "Nectar" is *ojā*, in Vedic texts called *soma* or
    *amṛta* ("ambrosia" of immortality). The battle over
    nectar by gods (*deva*) and demons (*asura*) is a very ancient
    element of Indo-European mythology.

[^831]: Here Sakka makes a clean break from the violent delights he
    enjoyed in former (Vedic) times.

[^832]: *Punarāyu* is a unique term. It probably means that
    Sakka can extend his current fortunate birth due to the merit of
    Dhamma.

[^833]: To die "unconfused" or "consciously" is said to be a benefit of
    Dhamma practice (eg. [AN
    5.215:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.215/en/sujato#2.3)).

[^834]: "According to method" (*ñāyena*) recalls
    *ñāyapaṭipanno* as a description of the noble ones. It
    means practicing according with the noble eightfold path, a "method"
    that yields definite results.

[^835]: This refers to the possibility of achieving perfection
    (*arahattā*).

[^836]: That is, after passing away as Sakka and being reborn as a
    human, he will subsequently return to the heaven realm.

[^837]: He predicts that his final life will be in this high realm that
    is inhabited by non-returners ([AN
    9.12:6.7](https://suttacentral.net/an9.12/en/sujato#6.7)).

[^838]: *Karomasi* is middle imperative 1st plural, "we should do",
    glossed by the commentary as "we should pay homage"
    (*namakkāraṁ karoma*).

[^839]: *Samaṁ* is an indeclinable in the sense "likewise".

[^840]: *Sāmaṁ* is an indeclinable in the sense "oneself,
    personally, one's own".

[^841]: A *gandharva* wedding must be a mutual love match.

[^842]: "Touching the ground with his hand" is a unique gesture in the
    early Pali, immortalized in later legend when the Buddha touches the
    ground to invoke the Earth Goddess as witness of his striving.

[^843]: Sakka is also said to have been accompanied by 80,000 deities at
    [SN 40.10:4.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn40.10/en/sujato#4.4). This
    is one of many indications that this is a late discourse, several of
    which have been touched on above: late or unique terminology; fancy
    literary styles; adoption of doctrinal passages from elsewhere in a
    sometimes clumsy fashion; and so on. In determining whether a sutta
    is late or early, we do not rely on a single definitive reason, but
    on a cluster of independent criteria which taken together are most
    easily explained in terms of historical development.

