[^844]: This discourse is copied from [MN
    10](https://suttacentral.net/mn10/en/sujato). The section on the
    four noble truths has been expanded with material mostly drawn from
    [MN 141](https://suttacentral.net/mn141/en/sujato). These discourses
    are the most influential texts for modern Theravada meditation,
    prompting countless modern commentaries. Comparative study of the
    several parallel versions reveals that this discourse, while
    comprised almost entirely of early material, was compiled in this
    form as one of the latest texts in the Pali suttas. \| While
    mindfulness is always useful ([SN
    46.53:15.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.53/en/sujato#15.4)), the
    "establishment of mindfulness" (*satipaṭṭhāna*) refers
    especially to a conscious development of contemplative practices
    based on mindfulness, i.e. "mindfulness meditation".

[^845]: The phrase *ekāyano maggo* ("path to convergence")
    is given multiple meanings in commentaries and ancient translations.
    Outside of *satipaṭṭhāna*, it is used in only one
    context in Pali, where it means to "come together with" ([MN
    12:37.5](https://suttacentral.net/mn12/en/sujato#37.5)). At [SN
    47.18:3.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.18/en/sujato#3.4) the
    phrase is spoken by Brahmā, which suggests it was a
    Brahmanical term. At Bṛhadāraṇyaka
    Upaniṣad 2.4.11---a passage full of details shared with
    the suttas---it means a place where things unite or converge. Thus
    *satipaṭṭhāna* leads to everything "coming together as
    one". In other words, as seventh factor of the noble eightfold path,
    it leads to *samādhi*, the eighth factor ([SN
    45.1:3.9](https://suttacentral.net/sn45.1/en/sujato#3.9); see also
    [MN 44:12.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#12.3)).

[^846]: The idiom *kāye kāyānupassī*,
    literally "observes a body in the body" refers to focusing on a
    specific aspect of embodied experience, such as the breath, the
    postures, etc. \| "Keen" (or "ardent", *ātāpī*) implies
    effort, while "aware" (*sampajāno*) is the wisdom of
    understanding situation and context. \| "Covetousness and
    displeasure" (*abhijjhādomanassaṁ*) are the strong
    forms of desire and aversion that are overcome by sense restraint in
    preparation for meditation.

[^847]: "Feelings" (*vedanā*) are the basic tones of
    pleasant, painful, or neutral, not the complexes we call "emotions".

[^848]: "Mind" (*citta*) is simple awareness. In meditation contexts,
    "mind" is often similar in meaning to *samādhi*.

[^849]: "Principles" (*dhammā*) are the natural "systems"
    of cause and effect that underlie the "teachings". The renderings
    "mind objects" or "mental qualities" are incorrect, as many of the
    things spoken of in this section are neither mind objects nor mental
    qualities. "Phenomena" is a possible translation, but the emphasis
    is not on the "appearance" of things, but on the "principles"
    governing their conditional relations.

[^850]: The context here---a mendicant gone to the forest---establishes
    that this practice takes place in the wider context of the Gradual
    Training. Indeed, this whole sutta can be understood as an expansion
    of this phrase, mentioned briefly at [DN
    2:67.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#67.3).

[^851]: The most fundamental meditation instruction in Buddhism. Notice
    how the Buddha phrases it: not "concentrate on the breath" as an
    object, but rather "breathing" as an activity to which one brings
    mindfulness.

[^852]: The stages of breath meditation are not meant to be done
    deliberately, but to be observed and understood as the natural
    process of deepening meditation. When starting out, the breath is
    somewhat rough and coarse.

[^853]: Over time, the breath becomes more subtle and soft.

[^854]: Contextually the idiom "whole body" (*sabbakāya*)
    here refers to the breath, marking the fuller and more continuous
    awareness that arises with tranquility. Some practitioners, however,
    interpret it as the "whole physical body", broadening awareness to
    encompass the movement and settling of energies throughout the body.

[^855]: The "physical process" (*kāyasaṅkhāraṁ*) is the
    breath ([SN
    41.6:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn41.6/en/sujato#1.8)).

[^856]: Text has "long" and "short", but "deep" and "shallow" or "heavy"
    and "light" are more idiomatic for describing the breath in English.

[^857]: "Internally" is one's own body, "externally" the bodies of
    others, or external physical phenomena. This distinction is applied
    broadly in Buddhist meditation, but it is more relevant in some
    contexts than others. In the case of the breath, one is focusing on
    one's own breath, but when contemplating, say, a dead body, or the
    material elements, there is more of an external dimension. Starting
    with "me" in here and the "world" out there, this practice dissolves
    this distinction so that we see we are of the same nature as
    everything else.

[^858]: This is the *vipassanā* ("insight" or
    "discernment") dimension of meditation, observing not just the rise
    and fall of phenomena, but also their conditioned "nature" as being
    "liable" (*-dhamma*) to impermanence. The meaning of this passage is
    explained at ([SN
    47.42](https://suttacentral.net/sn47.42/en/sujato)). Apart from
    these passages, *vipassanā* in
    *satipaṭṭhāna* pertains specially to the observation of
    principles.

[^859]: Mindfulness meditation leads to a range of knowledges as
    detailed by Anuruddha at [SN
    52.6](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.6/en/sujato) and [SN
    52.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn52.11/en/sujato)--24. An arahant
    is "independent" of any attachment (eg. [MN
    143](https://suttacentral.net/mn143/en/sujato)), but
    *satipaṭṭhāna* is also taught to give up dependency on
    views of the past and future ([DN
    29:40.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn29/en/sujato#40.1)).

[^860]: In early Pali, this practice is found only in the two
    Satipaṭṭhānasuttas and the closely related
    Kāyagatāsatisutta ([MN
    119](https://suttacentral.net/mn119/en/sujato)). It is practiced by
    developing a reflexive awareness of one's posture and activity as it
    proceeds, often assisted by moving slowly and carefully.

[^861]: "Situational awareness" (*sampajañña*) understands
    the context and purpose of activities. The main examples here
    illustrate the activities of daily monastic life: leaving the
    monastery on almsround, restraint while in the town, care wearing
    the robes, then mindfully eating and going to the toilet.

[^862]: This practice is intended to counter sexual desire and
    obsession. The primary focus is on one's own body, rather than
    another's body, although that can be brought in also. By focusing on
    aspects of our body that we normally prefer to ignore, we move
    towards a healthy sense of acceptance and neutrality towards our
    body.

[^863]: Thirty-one parts are mentioned in early texts, later expanded to
    thirty-two with the addition of the "brain"
    (*matthaluṅga*).

[^864]: The "bag with openings at both ends" is the body. Not all the
    varieties of grains and beans can be positively identified.

[^865]: While meditation on the elements is commonly taught in early
    texts, this phrase is found only in the two
    Satipaṭṭhānasuttas and the
    Kāyagatāsatisutta. Detailed instructions are found in
    such suttas as [MN 28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28/en/sujato) and
    [MN 140](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato). This meditation
    works in any posture, whereas breath meditation is best done
    sitting, to allow the breath to become still.

[^866]: The "elements" are the four states of matter as represented by
    their primary material example and their dominant property: earth as
    a solid with the property of resisting or upholding; water as a
    liquid with the property of binding; air as a gas with the property
    of movement; and fire ("heat" or "energy") as plasma with the
    property of transformation.

[^867]: This gruesome image shows that butchery of cows was a normal
    feature of ancient Indian life.

[^868]: Cremation was expensive and not available to everyone. Bodies
    might be left in the charnel ground for a variety of reasons, such
    as local customs, lack of funds, or in cases of inauspicious death
    such as murder or execution. This is still seen in some places
    today, and monastics occasionally take the opportunity to practice
    meditation beside a corpse. However the wording of the Pali sounds
    like an imaginative exercise.

[^869]: The observed corpse is not gendered. The purpose is not to
    become repulsed by an objectified other, but to understand the
    mortality of one's own body.

[^870]: It takes decades for bones to rot to powder, again suggesting it
    is an imaginative contemplation.

[^871]: Literally "a feeling among the feelings"; the practice shows
    that the meditator contemplates specific feelings as they occur.

[^872]: Pali employs direct quotes to indicate reflexive awareness: you
    feel the feeling and you know that you feel the feeling. It does not
    mean that you have to literally say "I feel a pleasant feeling",
    although some adopt that as a meditation method.

[^873]: Feelings "of the flesh" (*sāmisa*) are associated
    with the body and sensual desires ([SN
    36.31:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#4.1)).

[^874]: Feelings "not of the flesh" (*nirāmisa*) are
    associated with renunciation and especially with the
    *jhānas* and liberation ([SN
    36.31:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#5.1)).

[^875]: This would include the feelings of loss, doubt, and dejection
    that can occur during the spiritual path (see [MN
    44:28.6](https://suttacentral.net/mn44/en/sujato#28.6)).

[^876]: The feeling of the fourth *jhāna* and higher
    liberations ([SN
    36.31:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn36.31/en/sujato#8.2)).

[^877]: In Buddhist theory, awareness of the presence or absence of
    qualities such as greed is explained on three levels. There is the
    simple happenstance of whether greed is present at that time or not.
    Then there is the mind freed of greed through the power of
    absorption. Finally there is the liberation from greed which comes
    with full awakening.

[^878]: The mind is "constricted internally" due to dullness and
    "scattered externally" due to the distractions of desire ([SN
    51.20:18.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn51.20/en/sujato#18.1)).

[^879]: The following terms "expansive" (*mahaggata*), "supreme"
    (*anuttara*), "immersed" (*samāhita*), and "freed"
    (*vimutta*) all refer to states of absorption and/or awakening.

[^880]: The Satipaṭṭhānavibhaṅga of the Pali Abhidhamma
    only mentions the hindrances and awakening factors in this section
    ([Vb 7](https://suttacentral.net/vb7)). This, together with a range
    of other evidence, suggests that this was the original content of
    the observation of principles.

[^881]: Here causality is introduced. In the contemplation of mind, the
    meditator was aware of the presence or absence of desire in the
    mind. Now they look deeper, investigating the cause of desire and
    understanding how to be free of it forever. This contemplation of
    the "principles" of cause and effect is the distinctive feature of
    this section.

[^882]: The Buddhist schools debated whether this included physical
    tiredness or not. The Theravada argued that it was purely a mental
    laziness, as even the Buddha got sleepy.

[^883]: "Form" (*rūpa*) is one's own body and the external
    material world experienced through the senses. More subtly, it
    represents the "appearance" of physical phenomena, even when
    experienced solely in the mind as color, visions, etc.

[^884]: "Perception" (*saññā*) is the recognition or
    interpretation of experience in terms of meaningful wholes. We see,
    for example, "color" yet we perceive a "person". In the Vinaya we
    find many examples where a person perceived things in one way, yet
    they turned out to be something else.

[^885]: In the five aggregates, *saṅkhārā* is a synonym for
    "volition" (*cetanā*). The traditions later used it as
    a catch-all category for everything that does not fit in the other
    aggregates. In the suttas, however, the purpose of the aggregates is
    not to classify everything that exists, but to contemplate aspects
    of experience that we tend to identify as a "self".

[^886]: At [SN
    35.232:3.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.232/en/sujato#3.2) the
    "fetter that arises dependent on both" is identified as "desire and
    lust" (*chandarāga*).

[^887]: These seven factors that lead to awakening
    (*bojjhaṅgā*, [SN
    46.5](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.5/en/sujato)) are commonly
    presented in opposition to the five hindrances (eg. [SN
    46.2](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.2/en/sujato), [SN
    46.23](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.23/en/sujato), [SN
    46.55](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.55/en/sujato)).

[^888]: "Mindfulness" includes the recollection of the teachings ([SN
    46.3:1.8](https://suttacentral.net/sn46.3/en/sujato#1.8)) as well as
    mindfulness meditation.

[^889]: Likewise, this includes the inquiry into *dhammas* as
    "teachings" as well as "phenomena" or "principles".

[^890]: Due to their development of the two wings of *samatha* and
    *vipassanā* meditation as described in this sutta,
    practised in the context of the teaching and training as a whole,
    the meditator realizes the four noble truths at the moment of
    stream-entry.

[^891]: The sutta now proceeds in analytical fashion, digging deeper
    into the details of the four noble truths. The fundamental
    definitions were taught in the Buddha's first sermon ([SN
    56.11:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11/en/sujato#4.1)).

[^892]: As at [DN 15.4.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn15.4.3/en/sujato),
    *jāti* is invariably defined as the rebirth of beings,
    not as simple arising. The same applies to old age and death.

[^893]: In this and following definitions we mainly find mere verbal
    variations of the basic term.

[^894]: *Dukkha* ("pain", "suffering") is here restricted to physical
    pain. Elsewhere it may be any kind of painful feeling, while in the
    four noble truths it is suffering of any sort, including subtle
    forms of existential suffering.

[^895]: *Domanassa* normally means "sadness", but sometimes it contrasts
    with desire, in which case it is a form of aversion.

[^896]: *Piya* often refers to those who are dear and beloved, but as
    shown here it can also mean simply anything that is liked.

[^897]: This is an example of "painful feeling not of the flesh". The
    Buddha is here denying the efficacy of prayer, invocation, or magic
    spells.

[^898]: The following list of properties that relate to the senses
    gradually moves from the more basic to the more sophisticated.

[^899]: "Eye consciousness" is aware only of "light"; it sees colors but
    does not interpret them.

[^900]: "Contact" or "stimulus" happens when the sense base, the sense
    object, and the sense consciousness all occur together.

[^901]: "Perception" interprets the "light" that is seen, organizing it
    in meaningful wholes. For example, the eye sees the color white,
    while perception recognizes that it is "white", and further, that
    that white color is in fact a "wall".

[^902]: To continue the example, once the light has been interpreted by
    perception as a "wall", we then make the choice to walk around it
    rather than through it. Choices therefore depend on perceptions.

[^903]: "Thought" is *vitakka*.

[^904]: "Consideration" is *vicāra*, a more sustained
    exercize of thought.

[^905]: Mindfulness is not a path in and of itself, but rather is the
    seventh factor of the eightfold path.

[^906]: The fourth noble truth is the path, while the first path factor
    is the noble truths. These two teachings are different perspectives
    on the same *dhamma*.

[^907]: *Saṅkappa* is normally a synonym of *vitakka* in
    the suttas, hence the rendering "right thought". It is, however, not
    just verbalized thought, but the direction in which one applies the
    mind. This factor is the emotional counterpart of right view,
    ensuring that the path is motivated by love and compassion.

[^908]: The first three of the five precepts. "Sexual misconduct" is the
    betrayal of trust in a sexual relationship.

[^909]: Defined for a monastic in the long section on ethics in the
    Sāmaññaphalasutta ([DN
    2:56.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#56.1)) and for a lay
    person as trade in weapons, living creatures, meat, intoxicants, and
    poisons ([AN
    5.177:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an5.177/en/sujato#1.3)).

[^910]: The emphasis is on "develop in this way" (*evaṁ
    bhāveyya*), that is, with the full practice including
    deep absorption as the culmination of the path as a whole.

[^911]: A similar promise of results in at most seven years is found at
    [DN 25:22.9](https://suttacentral.net/dn25/en/sujato#22.9), [MN
    10:46.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn10/en/sujato#46.3), and [MN
    85:59.3](https://suttacentral.net/mn85/en/sujato#59.3); and at most
    ten years at [AN
    10.46:7.3](https://suttacentral.net/an10.46/en/sujato#7.3).

