[^912]: Kumārakassapa was ordained at twenty ([Kd
    1:75.1.1](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd1/en/sujato#75.1.1)). He
    features in the Vammikasutta ([MN
    23](https://suttacentral.net/mn23/en/sujato)), and his verses are
    collected in the Theragāthā ([Thag
    2.41](https://suttacentral.net/thag2.41/en/sujato)). He was declared
    the foremost of those with brilliant speech ([AN
    1.217](https://suttacentral.net/an1.217/en/sujato)), apparently on
    the basis of this discourse. \| The Pāyāsisuta is the
    only major Buddhist text that has a Jain parallel,
    Paesi-kahāṇayaṁ, a similar dialogue between Paesi and
    Keśin in Setavyā.

[^913]: Setavyā was north-east of Sāvatthī.

[^914]: Pāyāsi was a *khattiya* yet he receives a
    *brahmadeyya*. The sense of *brahmadeyya* as a donation to brahmins
    is well attested in inscriptions, so I think this is likely a
    mistake in the text, rather than evidence that the practice was not
    for brahmins only.

[^915]: This is wrong view per [MN
    117:5.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn117/en/sujato#5.1).

[^916]: This idiom recurs at [AN
    6.38:1.5](https://suttacentral.net/an6.38/en/sujato#1.5) where, as
    here, it refers to a well-known view and cannot mean that they have
    never heard of it. There the text and commentary read
    *māhaṁ*, which with the aorist is prohibitive not
    negatory. It is an idiom expressing dislike.

[^917]: While the world "down here" is bogged down in its messy and
    ephemeral issues, the heavenly bodies proceed in their serene,
    glorious, stately indifference. Ignoring gravity, self-luminous, and
    apparently eternal, they operate according to what appears to be an
    entirely different set of rules, a "meta-physics". What Newton did
    in physics the Buddha did in spirituality: show that the heavens,
    despite appearances, operate with the same set of conditioned rules
    as apply down here.

[^918]: Kassapa's argument here doesn't directly establish his
    conclusion. It is possible that gods exist on an entirely separate
    plane that has nothing to do with kamma and rebirth.

[^919]: This is still a major factor in shaping belief. People will
    reject the opinions of experts and believe people that they know.

[^920]: Compare Jaiminīya Brāhmaņa 1.42, where
    Varuṇa asphyxiated his son Bhṛgu in order
    to send him on a journey to the "other world", inducing a near-death
    experience. Bhṛgu saw men cutting other men to pieces
    and eating them, and other sights both horrifying and beautiful, all
    the while wondering if what he saw was real, before his breath was
    returned to him.

[^921]: Follow PTS reading *uddassetvā*, which at [MN
    82:11.9](https://suttacentral.net/mn82/en/sujato#11.9) has the sense
    "visit".

[^922]: Kassapa, however, has not established the existence of an
    afterlife, he has merely refuted Pāyāsi's argument. Per
    Occam's razor, the burden of proof lies on the one who wishes to
    establish the existence of the afterlife, not on the one who denies
    it. His arguments, however, become more persuasive if they are
    understood as building on the initial agreement on the divinity of
    the sun and moon. He knows that Pāyāsi accepts some
    form of other world, even if he says otherwise, so the argument
    hinges on whether Pāyāsi's methods are sufficient to
    *disprove* the kind of other world that Kassapa proposes, i.e. one
    driven by kamma.

[^923]: Follow PTS reading *ubbāhati*. Cf. [AN
    3.93:6.4](https://suttacentral.net/an3.93/en/sujato#6.4) for the
    sense "transport".

[^924]: 36,000,000 years.

[^925]: This recognizes the relativity of time.

[^926]: Pāyāsi makes a good point; he only relies on
    sources that he knows he can trust.

[^927]: Kassapa establishes the empirical method by which these truths
    are known. Science extends knowledge by means of external
    instruments, while meditation extends the scope of consciousness. A
    non-scientist cannot understand how a scientist establishes their
    conclusions, and can only rely on trust in the scientific
    establishment. Likewise a non-meditator cannot understand the
    capacity of expanded consciousness.

[^928]: The commentary explains *opabhoggā* ("reward") as
    *pādaparicārikā* ("wife").

[^929]: Read *opāṭesi*.

[^930]: Prefer Mahāsaṅgīti reading *yāva
    vijāyāmi* over PTS *yāva
    jānāmi* ("until I know"); it echoes *yāva
    vijāyāmi* above. The phrase is not fully coherent,
    which is understandable given the circumstances.

[^931]: "Irrationally" is *ayoniso*, literally "not sourcewise". This
    passage gives a nice real world example of what it means: the means
    employed are unrelated to the end sought.

[^932]: Pāyāsi's experiments were cruel, but no more so
    than many recorded in recent history.

[^933]: We assume that a soul must be immaterial and invisible, but
    clearly this was not always the case at the time. From [DN
    1](https://suttacentral.net/dn1/en/sujato) we know that there was an
    almost inexhaustible variety of views about the self or soul.

[^934]: This echoes Upaniṣadic discussions of the nature of
    the dream state and its relation to death. See for example
    Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.1.18, which says
    one might become a brahmin or king in a dream.

[^935]: Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.19
    describes the soul returning to the body like a tired hawk returning
    to the nest.

[^936]: Aside from the cruelty, this echoes the dictum attributed to
    Galileo: "Measure what is measurable, and make measurable what is
    not so." Given sufficient precision, this method could be effective
    in testing for the existence for a physical soul that has mass.

[^937]: A dead body will, if anything, weigh less due to excretion and
    dehydration.

[^938]: The misconception that iron is lighter when heated is repeated
    elsewhere (eg. [SN
    51.22:4.1](https://suttacentral.net/sn51.22/en/sujato#4.1)). In
    fact, assuming there are no chemical reactions, it will be very
    slightly heavier due to relativistic effects, yet less dense and
    hence more buoyant. These changes are too small to be detected by
    Pāyāsi's methods, though.

[^939]: The commentary explains *āmato* as *addhamato*
    ("half-dead").

[^940]: At [AN 9.37](https://suttacentral.net/an9.37/en/sujato) this
    rather abrupt insertion more aptly describes a deep meditation.

[^941]: Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.4.8 employs
    the same metaphor in the search for the soul.

[^942]: Accept PTS reading *gavesasi*.

[^943]: Pāyāsi honestly acknowledges the role of social
    conformity and shame in shaping views.

[^944]: Although this became the first story of the Jātaka
    collection ([Ja 1](https://suttacentral.net/ja1/en/sujato)), here it
    is not a Jātaka, as it is not framed as a past life of
    the Buddha.

[^945]: While the places are not specified, the journey from "east to
    west" across desolate lands suggests they may have been venturing
    from the rich plains of the Ganges west across the Thar Desert of
    Rajasthan.

[^946]: Read with PTS *gadrabharathena* ("donkey cart") for *bhadrena
    rathena* ("fine cart").

[^947]: The obviously suspicious stranger depicts the genuine dangers of
    trade in unknown regions, warning the traveler of raiding tribes as
    well as supernatural creatures.

[^948]: Again the criteria that only those who are known may be trusted.

[^949]: The ancient Indian game of dice involved casting an handful of
    *vibhītaka* seeds (also known as "bedda nuts", from
    Terminalia bellirica). A number divisible by four was "perfect"
    (*kaṭa*), so the fifth seed meant a "losing" throw
    (*kali*; cf. *apaṇṇaka* in [MN
    60](https://suttacentral.net/mn60/en/sujato) and notes).

[^950]: *Pajohissāmi* is related to Sanskrit *juhoti*,
    usually used in the sense "to offer as libation", a meaning accepted
    by the commentary here. More likely it simply means to "roll out"
    (like pouring a sacrifice) by analogy.

[^951]: *Gāmapaṭṭaṁ* (variants *-padaṁ*,
    *-paddhanaṁ*, *-patthaṁ*,
    *pajjaṁ*) is explained by the commentary as an
    abandoned village site.

[^952]: The sunk cost fallacy.

[^953]: Say what you will about Pāyāsi, he had character.

[^954]: Compare [DN 5:4.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn5/en/sujato#4.5).

[^955]: For *guḷavālakāni*, *guḷa* is "ball",
    *vāla* is "tail"; compare *macchavāḷaka*
    ("fish-tailed") at [Kd
    15:29.4.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-kd15/en/sujato#29.4.2).

[^956]: Cp. [AN 5.147](https://suttacentral.net/an5.147/en/sujato), [AN
    9.20](https://suttacentral.net/an9.20/en/sujato).

[^957]: *Divāvihāra* is the "day's meditation", while
    *divāseyya* is "siesta".
