[^29]: The Buddha refers to the events of this sutta at [DN
    8:23.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#23.2), but apart from
    that Nigrodha ("Banyan") appears to be unknown. A "wanderer" may or
    may not be Brahmanical, but in DN 8 Nigrodha is called
    *tapabrahmacārī*, which suggests he was a celibate
    student of a Brahmanical teacher. \| The commentary describes
    *udumbarikā* ("Fig") as *devī* ("Queen"),
    while DA 8 says she is a "brahmin lady". She too does not seem to
    appear elsewhere.

[^30]: Sandhāna ("Conciliation") was recognized as an
    eminent lay follower at ([AN
    6.120--139:1.14](https://suttacentral.net/an6.120-139/en/sujato#1.14)).

[^31]: "One-eyed cow" is *gokāṇā*.

[^32]: *Orodheyyāma* normally means "enclose, trap" like ox
    in a pen ([AN
    6.60:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an6.60/en/sujato#3.1)), but here
    it is glossed in the commentary as *vinandheyyāma*
    ("twist around").

[^33]: This discourse highlights the Buddha's method of engaging with
    people of other religions. He is open-hearted and interested in
    their views. He prefers to build on common ground, but is not afraid
    to criticize when it is warranted. And his aim is not to win
    converts, but to help people be free of suffering.

[^34]: "Higher disgust of sin" renders *adhijegucche*. The idea is that
    people are tainted with corruption, somewhat comparable to the
    notion of "original sin", although due to their own actions in the
    past rather than ancestral legacy. In "disgust" at that sin, they
    practice forms of fervent mortification (*tapas*) to burn out the
    corruption.

[^35]: The phrase *kathaṁ santā* is unique; it
    echoes *evaṁ sante* below.

[^36]: See the passage at [DN
    8:14.3](https://suttacentral.net/dn8/en/sujato#14.3) and notes
    thereto.

[^37]: The Buddha shifts attention from the external practice to the
    psychological state that accompanies it.

[^38]: "In expectation" (*sāpekkho*): when they give up
    something they cannot eat, they expect to be given more suitable
    food.

[^39]: "Sneaks" is *attānaṁ adassayamāno*,
    literally, "not showing himself". They like to hang about with lay
    folk, but hide the fact that they do so.

[^40]: As here, this item typically follows "wrong view". At [AN
    10.78:1.9](https://suttacentral.net/an10.78/en/sujato#1.9) it is
    said to be a bad quality of Jain ascetics. Thus being "attached to
    one's own views" refers both to the subjective clinging as well as
    the objective incorrectness of the views.

[^41]: A "fourfold restraint" (*cātuyāma*, or
    *cāujjāma* in Jain Ardhamagadhi) is attributed to Jain
    founder Pārśva in Isibhāsiyāiṁ 31, where
    it is an abbreviated list: "from refraining from killing to
    refraining from possessions"
    (*pāṇātivāta-veramaṇeṇaṁ jāvā
    pariggaha-veramaṇeṇaṁ*); the missing items are not
    stealing (*asteya*) and truth (*satya*). The Jain text
    Uttarādhyayanasūtra 23 shows that Mahāvīra
    added nakedness to make five. Five are also found in
    Yogasūtra 2.30 and the Jain
    Tattvārthasūtra 7: non-harming (*ahiṁsā*),
    truth (*satya*), no stealing (*asteya*), celibacy (*brahmacarya*),
    and non-possessiveness (*aparigrahā*). \| A different
    "fourfold restraint" is said to be a Jain practice at [DN
    2:29.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn2/en/sujato#29.2).

[^42]: This extends the basic precept. The same analysis is applied to
    the "ten ways of performing deeds" at [AN
    3.163](https://suttacentral.net/an3.163/en/sujato). \| The
    distinction between one's own action and another's action is noted
    at Isibhāsiyāiṁ 31.42, although the wording and sense
    are different.

[^43]: *Bhāvitamāsīsati* is unique. In this and similar
    contexts, the Pali tradition says *bhāvita* ("reward",
    normally "developed") is the "five sense pleasures" as they see it
    (*bhāvitaṁ nāma tesaṁ
    saññāya pañca kāmaguṇā*; cp.
    [MN 56](https://suttacentral.net/mn56/en/sujato) commentary: *ettha
    ca bhāvitanti pañcakāmaguṇā*), explaining
    that this is a usage of the sectarians (Saddanīti ch.
    4: *titthiyasamaye pana bhāvitoti kāmaguṇo
    vuccati*).

[^44]: This passage sets a powerful template for sincere engagement.

[^45]: This whole ending sequence is unique.

