[^221]: This is one of the latest suttas in the Pali
    Nikāyas. Typically this topic only comes up in relation
    to the Buddha's fulfillment of Brahmanical prophecies. Here it is
    developed with a series of ornate verses, none of which have
    parallels. Nonetheless, it is worth noting that nowhere in the
    extensive discussions of the Buddha's past good deeds is there any
    mention of the later concepts of the *pāramīs*
    ("perfections") or the Bodhisatta path.

[^222]: The marks are elsewhere listed in [DN
    14:1.32.7](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato#1.32.7) and [MN
    91:9.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn91/en/sujato#9.1). I discuss the
    translation of the marks in my comments to DN 14.

[^223]: The later astrological texts such as the
    Gārgīyajyotiṣa and Bṛhatsaṁhitā that
    discuss similar marks are more concerned with how they indicate
    character and destiny than their moral causes.

[^224]: The key terms here are *daḷha* ("firm") and
    *avatthita* ("persistently"), which result in his firm stance.

[^225]: K.R. Norman's series of five articles on *The Metres of the
    Lakkhaṇa-suttanta* discusses the verses in detail, and
    my translation is indebted to him. He notes that the 20 verse
    passages employ no less than seven distinct metres, all of them
    either new or updated styles. Such a display of poetic virtuosity is
    rare in the Pali canon.

[^226]: The commentary confirms the Mahāsaṅgīti reading
    *khambhana* ("obstacle") here rather than PTS *gabbha* ('womb").

[^227]: He "conveyed happiness" (*sukhāvaho*), like a
    wheeled cart would convey goods. \| *Parivāra* means
    "surroundings, accompaniments", and I follow the commentary, which
    takes it in the sense of the "trimmings" accompanying the food.
    Given, however, that the kammic result is a large
    *parivāra* ("following"), it might mean that he gave
    not just physical things, but was generous with his followers also,
    engaging them in such beneficial tasks.

[^228]: This refers to the late legend of the soothsayers seeing the
    baby Siddhattha, and as such *kumāra* should be taken
    as "prince".

[^229]: Giving up killing results in long life. This seems to be applied
    by metaphor to having these long and elegant body parts.

[^230]: Whereas in the phrase *brahmujugatto*, *brahm-* means "extended,
    tall", here *brahmāva* means "like
    Brahmā", either as a play on words or by mistaken
    etymology.

[^231]: This verse spoken by the soothsayers.

[^232]: He receives bodily fullness as a result of giving food.

[^233]: "Tender" because he treated people tenderly; "serried" because
    his fingers and toes are kept gracefully together, not splayed and
    separated.

[^234]: "Inclusive and well-managed" renders *saṅgahita*.
    It means "included", as in those people who, due to the kindly
    actions, feel that they belong. For the sense "well-managed" see [AN
    8.49:2.3](https://suttacentral.net/an8.49/en/sujato#2.3). Because of
    acting kindly and inclusively, people are well-disposed and work
    well together.

[^235]: Even though the community is geographically dispersed, it is
    still coherent.

[^236]: Perhaps the uprightness of these marks relates to his speech
    being beneficial, leading upwards.

[^237]: It seems that his "swift" teaching techniques evoke the
    antelope.

[^238]: Read *anomanikkamo*.

[^239]: Asking questions leads to wisdom, and the mind of wisdom does
    not get attached.

[^240]: Giving fine coverings leads to fine skin. Less obviously, anger
    is said to lead to discoloring and ugliness.

[^241]: For this positive sense of *adhiṭṭhahi* compare [AN
    6.52:8.2](https://suttacentral.net/an6.52/en/sujato#8.2) and [MN
    140:11.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn140/en/sujato#11.1).

[^242]: There's a play on *abhivissaji* ("gave away") and *abhivassa*
    ("pouring rain").

[^243]: *Kanaka*, one of the many Indic words for gold, is from the same
    Proto-Indo European root as the English word "honey".

[^244]: Here *mokkha* = *pāmokkha* ("chief, best").

[^245]: The penis is the generative organ and hence part-creator of
    family. Being covered suggests that his sexuality was moderated and
    contained. His role was more than having children, it was building
    family.

[^246]: The banyan tree is not just proportioned, it offers shelter to
    many creatures. Touching the knees indicates connecting with the
    manyfolk, who at [AN
    5.196:3.1](https://suttacentral.net/an5.196/en/sujato#3.1) are
    likened to caterpillars reaching the knees.

[^247]: A *khema* is a sanctuary where animals flourish in peace,
    without fear of the hunter. Likewise, the Buddha's body flourishes
    and has a fullness to it. He is slim but not skinny.

[^248]: Decline in *dhamma* is missing here, but present both above and
    below in verse.

[^249]: The "ridged taste buds" are not merely for tasting, but support
    excellent digestion. Kammically, the rationale is that since he did
    not kill others, now nothing hurts him when he eats.

[^250]: Dark colored eyes give the impression of wide pupils and an open
    gaze, while the eyelashes of cows lend them a tenderness.

[^251]: *Abhiyogino* ("soothsayers") is a unique term, explained by the
    commentary, "they are dedicated to the lore of marks".

[^252]: The commentary says he took the lead in good deeds
    "unembarrassed, with head held high, his head filled with rapture
    and joy".

[^253]: One hair per pore, because his words of truth have only one
    meaning. Likewise, the tuft conveys purity and integrity.

[^254]: The number four connotes "all around, complete, universal",
    primarily from the four directions. It is multiplied to eight with
    the intermediate directions, and ten including above and below.
    Forty, then, is four times ten, a number of super-inclusiveness or
    super-universality. The lack of gaps corresponds with the lack of
    division between his followers.

[^255]: The commentary explains that those who flap their mouths with
    nonsensical gossip end up with weak or misshapen jaws.

[^256]: His teeth are not "crooked" or "stained" by corruption.

[^257]: The commentary explain *akhilamanimittamakaṇṭakaṁ*
    as "free of bandits" (*niccoraṁ*).

