[^258]: Sigālaka only appears in this sutta. His name means
    "little jackal".

[^259]: Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 5.5.1 recommends offerings to
    Agni in the east, Indra or Soma in the south, the All-gods in the
    west, Mitra and Varuṇa in the north, and
    Bṛhaspati in the middle. The quarters themselves are
    divine, since one can travel them and never reach the end
    (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.1.5). Atharva
    Veda 12.3.7--10 gives a domestic prayer for the quarters; here Yama
    dwells in the south with the Fathers, while Soma is in the west, and
    the other directions are not associated with specific deities.
    Maitrī Upaniṣad 7.1--6 details the
    spiritual meanings of the six quarters. In Buddhism, the quarters
    are said to be inhabited by the respective Four Great Kings as per
    [DN 32](https://suttacentral.net/dn32/en/sujato).

[^260]: Sigālaka followed blindly without considering the
    meaning as urged by Chāndogya Upaniṣad
    1.3.11.

[^261]: It is unusual to find "six" directions. Normally it is four,
    then eight (with intermediate directions), then ten (above and
    below). Praśna Upaniṣad 1.6 lists the six,
    then the intermediates.

[^262]: The Buddha outlines the contents of the discourse to follow.

[^263]: The teaching is structured to reinforce memorization. Give the
    number of items (twice), so you will notice if any are missing; list
    the items; recapitulate the numbers; then recapitulate the items
    once more in verse.

[^264]: First we learned what the bad deeds were, now we learn why
    people do them.

[^265]: "Drains on wealth" is *apāyamukha*, literally
    "openings for departure". This is emphasized here since
    Sigālaka wants to be a good son and not squander the
    family fortune.

[^266]: The most common phrase in Pali for alcoholic beverages lists
    three items. *Surā* is brewed from grains with yeast
    ([Bu Pc
    51:2.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc51/en/sujato#2.1.2))
    *Meraya* is made from flowers, fruits, or sugars ([Bu Pc
    51:2.1.4](https://suttacentral.net/pli-tv-bu-vb-pc51/en/sujato#2.1.4)).
    *Madya* is apparently a catchall. Together they correspond fairly
    well with the modern classification of alcoholic drinks as "beer,
    wine, and liquor". See also Manu 11.94, Arthaśāstra
    2.25, Suśrutasaṁhitā 1.45,
    Amarakośodghāṭana 3.6.

[^267]: Now each of the six drains on wealth are expanded and explained.

[^268]: *Vārunī* is said to have been distilled from
    hogweed with palm sap, "toddy".

[^269]: Assume *vāruṇī* is a truncated instrumental.

[^270]: *Kāhiti* is third person singular future of
    *karoti*.

[^271]: The subcommentary explains *atthā* as
    *dhanā* ("riches").

[^272]: Having explained the six drains on wealth, the Buddha moves on
    to the next item in the table of contents.

[^273]: Parents are in the east because that is where the sun is born.
    Tutors are to the south (*dakkhiṇā*) as they are owed
    an offering (*dakkhiṇā*). Family is one's legacy, so
    they lie with the setting sun in the west. Good friends keep you on
    the upright way to the north. Servants support you and make your
    life possible, like the earth below. And spiritual teachers lead you
    to heaven or transcendence above.

[^274]: "Protection in every region" (*disāsu
    parittāṇaṁ*) refers to when the student has completed
    their studies and goes off to travel, the teacher does what they can
    to ensure their safety in other regions.

[^275]: Marriage is based on mutual care and respect, not on dominance
    and obedience.

