[^276]: This discourse bears similarities to the
    Mahāsamayasutta ([DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato)). Thematically, that
    discourse is about the devotion of the deities, whereas this is
    about protection for the mendicants. \| I believe this is only place
    in whole canon that lists the *bhāṇavāra* at the start.

[^277]: Here Kuvera is called Vessavaṇa, which our text
    below explains as being derived from the name of his city.

[^278]: "Protection" is *rakkhā*, which is a synonym of
    *paritta*.

[^279]: For these verses, I lean heavily on the translation by
    Ānandajoti, *[The Āṭānāṭiya
    Discourse](https://suttacentral.nethttps://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-Translations/Safeguard/03-Tatiyakabhanavaram.htm)*.
    They are commonly recited in Theravada countries today. The recital
    begins with the seven Buddhas, for which see [DN
    14](https://suttacentral.net/dn14/en/sujato).

[^280]: Here Aṅgīrasa is used as a name rather than a
    descriptive epithet. Aṅgīras was one of the Vedic sages
    and the Aṅgīrasas are his descendants.
    Aṅgīras is regarded as the *pravara* or revered
    ancestor of the Gotama clan. Both names are associated with light:
    *aṅgīrasa* shares a root and is often synonymous with
    *agni* ("fire"), while *gotama* means "light dispelling dark".

[^281]: Here begins a series of verses dedicated to the divinities in
    each of the four quarters, proceeding in the standard way: east,
    south, west, north.

[^282]: This is according to the commentary (*taṁ
    rahadaṁ tattha evaṁ
    jānanti*).

[^283]: This relates back to the basic problem facing the *yakkhas*:
    shame. They know what they do is wrong, but they like it and hence
    feel shame when hearing the Dhamma. But the Buddha treats them with
    respect, without shaming or bias, and thus is able to lead them to
    the good. The commentary implicitly connects this line with [DN
    30:2.1.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn30/en/sujato#2.1.2), where the
    Buddha "examines" (*samekkhati*) the population for their individual
    and shared traits.

[^284]: The south has the shortest and least auspicious description. To
    the extent that it relates to physical geography, this echoes the
    perception of northerners at the time that the south of India lay
    outside the "civilized" realms (*āryāvarta*).

[^285]: The description of the west mirrors the east.

[^286]: The description of the north is by far the most elaborate. \|
    "Uttarakuru" is literally "north Kuru". It is mentioned in Sanskrit
    and Greek literature, where it sometimes appears as an actual
    country and other times as a place of fantasy. Attempts to locate it
    in a specific region in or beyond the Himalayas have proven
    inconclusive.

[^287]: Meru is another place that appears sometimes as a physical
    mountain and other times purely mystical. As home of the gods ([Snp
    3.11:4.3](https://suttacentral.net/snp3.11/en/sujato#4.3)), its peak
    is accessible only by psychic powers ([Thig
    14.1:19.3](https://suttacentral.net/thig14.1/en/sujato#19.3), [MN
    50:30.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn50/en/sujato#30.1)). It is the
    center of the world in Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain cosmologies. Today
    it is sometimes identified with Mount Kailash.

[^288]: This agrees with the description at [AN
    9.21:1.3](https://suttacentral.net/an9.21/en/sujato#1.3).

[^289]: Due to their lack of selfishness, they live in a kinder state of
    nature, which we selfish humans have lost ([DN
    27:16.1](https://suttacentral.net/dn27/en/sujato#16.1)).

[^290]: *Tuṇḍikīre* is explained by the commentary as
    "firestone". In the notes to his translation, Walshe suggests a
    relation with tandoor, which has been found as far back as the Indus
    Valley Civilization, a millennium before the Buddha.

[^291]: Cloven and uncloven was an important classification of animals
    in the Dharmaśāstras.

[^292]: The commentary says they were mostly carried on the backs of
    pregnant women (!). But the verb *anuyanti* indicates, rather, that
    they were "drawn along after", which suggests a rickshaw.

[^293]: The discourse is named after the first of these cities. The name
    is hard to explain, but all the names in this series have the
    element *nāṭa*, which is probably the name of the
    people. One meaning of *nāṭa* is "dance", and one of
    the unique features of this discourse is that each of the Four Great
    Kings is said to delight in song and dance. There is a long history
    of dancing divinities in India, and images of dancers go back as far
    as the Indus Valley Civilization. If we take *nāṭa* in
    the sense "the people of the dance", *kusināṭā* would
    therefore be "dancers of the grass" after the *kusa* grass essential
    to the Vedic rites of kingship. *Parakusināṭā* is the
    "further dancers of the grass", and *parakusiṭanāṭā* is
    probably a variation on that. *Nāṭapuriyā* is the
    "citadel of the dancers". Each of these associates the people of the
    dance with the idea of protection or authority, agreeing with the
    context, where the cities are said to belong to a great king. Thus
    the prefix *āṭā-* probably stems from
    *tāṇa* ("shelter, refuge"; the same root as *paritta*),
    in the sense of the "refuge of the dancers".

[^294]: Adopt the reading *nāṭapuriyā* found in
    Sinhalese-script manuscripts against the Mahāsaṅgīti's
    *nāṭasuriyā*.

[^295]: "Abounding in monkeys".

[^296]: "Flood of folk".

[^297]: *Navanavutiya* is "the city of the ninety-nine" i.e. three times
    thirty-three. \| *Ambara* is "sky".

[^298]: Also encountered at [DN
    17:1.3.8](https://suttacentral.net/dn17/en/sujato#1.3.8) and [DN
    16:5.18.5](https://suttacentral.net/dn16/en/sujato#5.18.5).
    Alakā is the capital of Kuvera in Sanskrit sources.

[^299]: The city Visāṇa is not encountered elsewhere, but
    it means "horn", possibly reinforcing the importance of "song and
    dance".

[^300]: These three names appear to be purely onomatopoeic, perhaps
    echoing musical sounds.

[^301]: These names suggest a connection with sustenance: "Nutritive",
    "Powerful", "Nourished by That".

[^302]: These are a set of associated solar names. Ariṭṭha
    and Nemi appear compounded in Sanskrit, Ariṣṭanemi,
    which evokes the powerful chariot of a conqueror ("indestructible
    rim", Rig Veda 1.89.6, 1.180.10, 3.53.17, 10.178.1). It was the name
    of the 22nd Jain *tīrthaṅkara*, and in Brahmanical
    texts of several figures, including a dragon
    (Mahābhārata 1.59.39a, 1114.62a, etc.) and an Asura
    king (Bhāgavatapurāṇa 8.6.31, 8.10.10). Along with the
    divine steed Tārkṣya, he is associated with
    Garuḍa, and was probably originally an epithet for the
    unstoppable wheel of the Sun, Sūra. This line, then,
    while a simple list of four names in Pali, appears to be a
    fragmented memory of a Vedic conception which might be translated:
    "King Sun, (the wheel) of indestructible rim".

[^303]: *Dharaṇī* the "bearer" is also a pregnant woman or
    Mother Earth.

[^304]: *Sāla* means "hall" or "sal tree", but the
    commentary says it was surrounded by creepers of that name.

[^305]: *Kuḷīrakā* appears to be the name of a crab-eating
    bird (*kuḷīra*). In honor of my native country, I name
    it after the kookaburra, which eats crabs and is renowned for its
    cry.

[^306]: In [Ja
    547:426.2](https://suttacentral.net/ja547/en/sujato#426.2) we find
    *koṭṭhā pokkharasātakā*, where the
    *koṭṭha* is evidently a woodpecker. *Satapatta* can
    mean woodpecker or lotus (or crane or peacock), and perhaps there is
    an association here, the "hundred-leaved \[bird\] of the lotus
    pond".

[^307]: For these gods, see my comment on [DN
    13:25.2](https://suttacentral.net/dn13/en/sujato#25.2). Here I will
    comment on the names not discussed elsewhere, especially in [DN
    20](https://suttacentral.net/dn20/en/sujato).

[^308]: This is presumably Bharadvāja
    Bārhaspatya, the rishi ancestor of the
    Bhāradvāja clan, many members of which are encountered
    in the suttas. It is unusual to find him listed along with the
    primary Vedic gods. The Bhāradvāja verses are mostly
    collected in the sixth book of the Rig Veda, where they show a
    special devotion to the god Pūṣan.

[^309]: These deities appear nowhere else. *Puṇṇaka* is
    "full", *guḷa* is "lump", and *karatiya* is unclear
    ("bean-like"?).

[^310]: The *yakkha* Sivaka ("blissful, auspicious") helped
    Anāthapiṇḍika visit the Buddha ([SN
    10.8:1.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.8/en/sujato#1.12)); he is
    possibly to be identified with Shiva. \| The dragon king Mucalinda
    sheltered the Buddha after his awakening ([Ud
    2.1:2.2](https://suttacentral.net/ud2.1/en/sujato#2.2)).

[^311]: *Yugandhara* is the tutelary deity of the mountain of that name.

[^312]: *Gopāla* is "cowherd", an epithet of both Krishna
    and Shiva.\| *Suppagedha* (or *supparodha*) is obscure.

[^313]: "Shame", "conduit" (or "craving"), and "stupidity" seem like odd
    companions.

[^314]: A saying by Pañcālacaṇḍa at [SN
    2.7](https://suttacentral.net/sn2.7/en/sujato) is quoted by
    Udāyī and explained by Ānanda at [AN
    9.42](https://suttacentral.net/an9.42/en/sujato). He would appear to
    be the wrathful (*caṇḍa*) protector of the
    Pañcāla clan, but a Pañcālacanda appears
    as a brahmin teacher at Aitereya Āraṇyaka 3.1.6. \|
    Āḷavaka is the tutelary deity of Āḷavī
    ([SN 10.12](https://suttacentral.net/sn10.12/en/sujato), [Snp
    1.10](https://suttacentral.net/snp1.10/en/sujato)).

[^315]: *Sumana* is "Happyheart", *sumukha* is "Fairface".

[^316]: *Dadhimukha* is "Milkface", and in the Mahābhārata
    is a name of a dragon. \| *Maṇi* is "gem". \|
    *Māṇivara* is "fine gem", although the commentary takes
    this as two names. \| Dīgha is identified by the
    commentary with Dīgha Parajana of [MN
    31:21.1](https://suttacentral.net/mn31/en/sujato#21.1).

[^317]: *Serīsaka* means "of *sirīsa* wood",
    perhaps the tutelary deity of a forest.

