
[^1]: Hê theos: Most probably—as 354a10–11 implies—the Thracian goddess Bendis,
whose cult had recently been introduced in Piraeus. However, for Athenians, Athena
is hê theos.

[^2]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. city.

[^3]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. cloak.

[^4]: See 485d6–e1.

[^5]: Namely, death.

[^6]: “God ever draws together like to like.”

[^7]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. masses.

[^8]: A slightly different version of the story appears in Herodotus 8.125.

[^9]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. justice.

[^10]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. craft.

[^11]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. captain.

[^12]: Odyssey 19.392–8.

[^13]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. virtue.

[^14]: In Greek superstition, anyone seen by a wolf before he sees it is struck dumb.

[^15]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. irony.

[^16]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. pancration.

[^17]: Proverbial characterization of an almost impossible task.

[^18]: I.e., for sailors and bodies.

[^19]: See 608d13–610d3.

[^20]: Sight is the virtue or excellence of the eyes.Without it, the eyes cannot achieve
what is advantageous to them: namely, sight. But Socrates assumes throughout Book 1 that virtues are types of craft (see 332d). Hence he can conclude that the eyes need
(a) further craft in order to achieve what is advantageous to them.

[^21]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. do better.

[^22]: The temples served as public treasuries, so that a temple robber is the equivalent of
(a) present-day bank robber.

[^23]: See 341e–342e above.

[^24]: Euêtheia, kakoêtheia:Thrasymachus uses euêtheia in the bad sense, to mean stupidity.

[^25]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. do better.

[^26]: What Socrates has in mind is explained at 350a.All expert musicians try to get the
same result, perfect harmony, so they tighten and loosen their strings to exactly the
same degree: namely, the one that will produce the right pitch. In the same way, all
doctors who are masters of medicine prescribe the same diet for people with the
same diseases: namely, the one that will best restore them to health.

[^27]: Reading katadoul≈sasyai.

[^28]: 347e.

[^29]: See Glossary of Terms s.v. virtue.

