# The Chapter on the Noble Path

### AN 10.145 The Noble Path  *Ariyamaggasutta*

"I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path. ... And what is
the ignoble path? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the ignoble path. And
what is the noble path? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the noble
path."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.146 The Dark Path  *Kaṇhamaggasutta*

"I will teach you the dark path and the bright path. ... And what is the
dark path? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong
livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong
knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is called the dark path. And what is
the bright path? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action,
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion,
right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the bright path."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.147 The True Teaching  *Saddhammasutta*

"I will teach you what is the true teaching and what is not the true
teaching. ... And what is not the true teaching? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called what is not the true teaching. And what is the true
teaching? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.148 The Teaching of the True Persons  *Sappurisadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the true persons and the
teaching of the untrue persons. ... And what is the teaching of the
untrue persons? Wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action,
wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion,
wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom. This is the teaching of the untrue
persons. And what is the teaching of the true persons? Right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom.
This is the teaching of the true persons."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.149 Should Be Activated  *Uppādetabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to activate and the principle not to
activate. ... And what is the principle not to activate? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to activate. And what is the
principle to activate? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to activate."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.150 Should Be Cultivated  *Āsevitabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to cultivate and the principle not to
cultivate. ... And what is the principle not to cultivate? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to cultivate. And what is the
principle to cultivate? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to cultivate."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.151 Should Be Developed  *Bhāvetabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to develop and the principle not to
develop. ... And what is the principle not to develop? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called the principle not to develop. And what is the principle
to develop? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle to develop."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.152 Should Be Made Much Of  *Bahulīkātabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to make much of and the principle not to
make much of. ... And what is the principle not to make much of? Wrong
view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to make much of. And what is
the principle to make much of? Right view, right thought, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to make much of."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.153 Should Be Recollected  *Anussaritabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to recollect and the principle not to
recollect. ... And what is the principle not to recollect? Wrong view,
wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong
freedom. This is called the principle not to recollect. And what is the
principle to recollect? Right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right
immersion, right knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the
principle to recollect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.154 Should Be Realized  *Sacchikātabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to realize and the principle not to
realize. ... And what is the principle not to realize? Wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, wrong immersion, wrong knowledge, and wrong freedom.
This is called the principle not to realize. And what is the principle
to realize? Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right
livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right
knowledge, and right freedom. This is called the principle to realize."



