# The Chapter on Good

### AN 10.178 Good  *Sādhusutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you what is good and what is not good. Listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And what, mendicants, is not good? Killing living creatures, stealing,
and sexual misconduct; speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; covetousness, ill will, and wrong view. This is called what
is not good.

And what is good? Avoiding killing living creatures, stealing, and
sexual misconduct; avoiding speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical; contentment, good will, and right view. This is called what
is good."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.179 The Teaching of the Noble Ones  *Ariyadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the noble ones, and what
is not the teaching of the noble ones. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak. ... And what is not the teaching of the noble ones?
Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called what is not the
teaching of the noble ones.

And what is the teaching of the noble ones? Not killing living creatures
... right view. This is called the teaching of the noble ones."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.180 Skillful  *Kusalasutta*

"I will teach you the skillful and the unskillful ... And what is the
unskillful? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
unskillful.

And what is the skillful? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the skillful."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.181 Beneficial  *Atthasutta*

"I will teach you the beneficial and the harmful. ... And what is the
harmful? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
harmful.

And what is the beneficial? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the beneficial."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.182 The Teaching  *Dhammasutta*

"I will teach you what is the teaching and what is not the teaching. ...
And what is not the teaching? Killing living creatures ... wrong view.
This is called what is not the teaching.

And what is the teaching? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.183 Defiled  *Āsavasutta*

"I will teach you the defiled principle and the undefiled. ... And what
is the defiled principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This
is called the defiled principle.

And what is the undefiled principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the undefiled principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.184 Blameworthy  *Vajjasutta*

"I will teach you the blameworthy principle and the blameless. ... And
what is the blameworthy principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong
view. This is called the blameworthy principle.

And what is the blameless principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the blameless principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.185 Mortifying  *Tapanīyasutta*

"I will teach you the mortifying principle and the unmortifying. ... And
what is the mortifying principle? Killing living creatures ... wrong
view. This is called the mortifying principle.

And what is the unmortifying principle? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the unmortifying principle."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.186 Leading to Accumulation  *Ācayagāmisutta*

"I will teach you the principle that leads to accumulation and that
which leads to dispersal. ... And what is the principle that leads to
accumulation? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called
the principle that leads to accumulation.

And what is the principle that leads to dispersal? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is called the principle that leads to
dispersal."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.187 With Suffering as Outcome  *Dukkhudrayasutta*

"I will teach you the principle that has suffering as outcome, and that
which has happiness as outcome. ... And what is the principle whose
outcome is suffering? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is
the principle whose outcome is suffering.

And what is the principle whose outcome is happiness? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is the principle whose outcome is
happiness."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.188 Result  *Vipākasutta*

"I will teach you the principle that results in suffering and that which
results in happiness. ... And what is the principle that results in
suffering? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
principle that results in suffering.

And what is the principle that results in happiness? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is called the principle that results in
happiness."

