# The Chapter on If You Want

### AN 10.71 One Might Wish  *Ākaṅkhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. There the Buddha
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live
restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and seeking
alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the
rules you've undertaken.

A mendicant might wish: 'May I be liked and approved by my spiritual
companions, respected and admired.' So let them fulfill their precepts,
be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect absorption, be
endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

A mendicant might wish: 'May I receive robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.' So let them fulfill their
precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not neglect
absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty huts.

A mendicant might wish: 'May the services of those whose robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick I enjoy be
very fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their
precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'When deceased family and relatives who have
passed away recollect me with a confident mind, may this be very
fruitful and beneficial for them.' So let them fulfill their precepts
...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I be content with any kind of robes,
almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.' So let
them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst.
May I endure the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.
May I endure rude and unwelcome criticism. And may I put up with
physical pain---sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and
life-threatening.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over desire and discontent, and
may desire and discontent not prevail over me. May I live having
mastered desire and discontent whenever they have arisen.' So let them
fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I prevail over fear and dread, and may fear
and dread not prevail over me. May I live having mastered fear and dread
whenever they arise.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I get the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind---when I want,
without trouble or difficulty.' So let them fulfill their precepts ...

A mendicant might wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it
with my own insight due to the ending of defilements.' So let them
fulfill their precepts, be committed to inner serenity of the heart, not
neglect absorption, be endowed with discernment, and frequent empty
huts.

'Live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in
the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in
suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules
you've undertaken.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.72 Thorns  *Kaṇṭakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof, together with several
well-known senior disciples. They included Venerables Cāla,
Upacāla, Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha,
Kaṭa, Kaṭissaṅga, and other well-known senior
disciples.

Now at that time several well-known Licchavis plunged deep into the
Great Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages,
they made a dreadful racket. Then those venerables thought:

"These several well-known Licchavis have plunged deep into the Great
Wood to see the Buddha. Driving a succession of fine carriages, they're
making a dreadful racket. But the Buddha has said that sound is a thorn
to absorption. Let's go to the Gosiṅga Sal Wood. There we
can meditate comfortably, free of noise and crowds." Then those
venerables went to the Gosiṅga Sal Wood, where they
meditated comfortably, free of noise and crowds.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, where are Cāla, Upacāla,
Kakkaṭa, Kaṭimbha, Kaṭa, and
Kaṭissaṅga? Where have these senior disciples gone?"

And the mendicants told him what had happened.

"Good, good, mendicants! It's just as those great disciples have so
rightly explained. I have said that sound is a thorn to absorption.

Mendicants, there are these ten thorns. What ten? Relishing company is a
thorn for someone who loves seclusion. Focusing on the beautiful feature
of things is a thorn for someone pursuing the meditation on ugliness.
Seeing shows is a thorn to someone restraining the senses. Lingering in
the neighborhood of females is a thorn to celibacy. Sound is a thorn to
the first absorption. Placing the mind and keeping it connected are a
thorn to the second absorption. Rapture is a thorn to the third
absorption. Breathing is a thorn to the fourth absorption. Perception
and feeling are a thorn to the attainment of the cessation of perception
and feeling. Greed, hate, and delusion are thorns.

Mendicants, live free of thorns! Live rid of thorns! Mendicants, live
free of thorns and rid of thorns! The perfected ones live free of
thorns, rid of thorns, free and rid of thorns."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.73 Likable  *Iṭṭhadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things are rare
in the world. What ten? Wealth, beauty, health, ethical conduct, the
spiritual life, friends, learning, wisdom, good qualities, and heaven
are likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things are roadblocks for these ten likable, desirable, and
agreeable things that are rare in the world. Sloth and lack of
initiative are a roadblock for wealth. Lack of adornment and decoration
are a roadblock for beauty. Unsuitable activity is a roadblock for
health. Bad friendship is a roadblock for ethical conduct. Lack of sense
restraint is a roadblock for the spiritual life. Dishonesty is a
roadblock for friends. Not reciting is a roadblock for learning. Not
wanting to listen and ask questions are roadblocks for wisdom. Lack of
commitment and reviewing are roadblocks for good qualities. Wrong
practice hinders heaven. These ten things are roadblocks for these ten
likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things
that are rare in the world. Application and initiative nourish wealth.
Adornment and decoration nourish beauty. Suitable activity nourishes
health. Good friendship nourishes ethical conduct. Sense restraint
nourishes the spiritual life. Honesty nourishes friends. Reciting
nourishes learning. Eagerness to listen and ask questions nourishes
wisdom. Commitment and reviewing nourish good qualities. Right practice
nourishes heaven. These ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable,
and agreeable things that are rare in the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.74 Growth  *Vaḍḍhisutta*

"Mendicants, a noble disciple who grows in ten ways grows nobly, taking
on what is essential and excellent in this life. What ten? He grows in
fields and lands, money and grain, wives and children, in bondservants,
workers, and staff, and in livestock. And he grows in faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom. A noble disciple who grows in ten ways
grows nobly, taking on what is essential and excellent in this life.

> Someone who grows in money and grain,\
> in wives, children, and livestock,\
> is wealthy, famous, and respected\
> by relatives and friends, and even by royals.
>
> When someone grows in faith and ethics,\
> wisdom, and both generosity and learning---\
> a good man such as he sees clearly,\
> and in this very life he grows in both ways."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.75 With Migasālā  *Migasālāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda
robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the home
of the laywoman Migasālā, where he sat on the seat spread
out. Then the laywoman Migasālā went up to Ānanda, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Honorable Ānanda, how on earth are we supposed to understand the
teaching taught by the Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both
reborn in exactly the same place in the next life? My father
Purāṇa was celibate, set apart, avoiding the vulgar act of
sex. When he passed away the Buddha declared that, since he was a
once-returner, he was reborn in the host of joyful gods. But my uncle
Isidatta was not celibate; he lived content with his wife. When he
passed away the Buddha also declared that, since he was a once-returner,
he was reborn in the host of joyful gods.

How on earth are we supposed to understand the teaching taught by the
Buddha, when the chaste and the unchaste are both reborn in exactly the
same place in the next life?"

"You're right, sister, but that's how the Buddha declared it."

Then Ānanda, after receiving almsfood at Migasālā's home,
rose from his seat and left. Then after the meal, on his return from
almsround, Ānanda went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
told him what had happened.

"Ānanda, who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish
incompetent aunty, with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to
assess individuals?

These ten people are found in the world. What ten? Take a certain person
who is unethical. And they don't truly understand the freedom of heart
and freedom by wisdom where that unethical conduct ceases without
anything left over. And they've not listened or learned or comprehended
theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a higher. They're
going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is unethical. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that unethical conduct
ceases without anything left over. And they have listened and learned
and comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher
place, not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case, the person who is unethical, but truly understands the
freedom of heart ... and has listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom is better and finer
than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream of the teaching
carries them along. But who knows the difference between them except a
Realized One? So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass
judgment on people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves.
I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is ethical. But they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that ethical conduct
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is ethical. And they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that ethical conduct ceases
without anything left over. And they've listened and learned and
comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is very lustful. And they don't truly
understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that lust
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is very lustful. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that lust ceases without
anything left over. And they've listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place, not a lower.
They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is irritable. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that anger ceases
without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned or
comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When their
body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not a
higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is irritable. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that anger ceases without
anything left over. And they've listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place, not a lower.
They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them ... I, or someone like me, may pass
judgment on people.

Take a certain person who is restless. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that restlessness
ceases without anything left over. And they've not listened or learned
or comprehended theoretically or found even temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a lower place, not
a higher. They're going to a lower place, not a higher.

Take a certain person who is restless. But they truly understand the
freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where that restlessness ceases
without anything left over. And they've listened and learned and
comprehended theoretically and found at least temporary freedom. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're headed for a higher place,
not a lower. They're going to a higher place, not a lower.

Judgmental people compare them, saying: 'This one has just the same
qualities as the other, so why is one worse and one better?' This will
be for their lasting harm and suffering.

In this case the person who is restless, but truly understands the
freedom of heart ... and has listened and learned and comprehended
theoretically and found at least temporary freedom is better and finer
than the other person. Why is that? Because the stream of the teaching
carries them along. But who knows the difference between them except a
Realized One? So, Ānanda, don't be judgmental about people. Don't pass
judgment on people. Those who pass judgment on people harm themselves.
I, or someone like me, may pass judgment on people.

Who is this laywoman Migasālā, a foolish incompetent aunty,
with an aunty's wit? And who is it that knows how to assess individuals?
These ten people are found in the world.

If Isidatta had achieved Purāṇa's level of ethical conduct,
Purāṇa could not have even known Isidatta's destination.
And if Purāṇa had achieved Isidatta's level of wisdom,
Isidatta could not have even known Purāṇa's destination. So
both individuals were lacking in one respect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.76 Three Things  *Tayodhammasutta*

"Mendicants, if three things were not found, the Realized One, the
perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha would not arise in the world,
and the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One would not
shine in the world. What three? Rebirth, old age, and death. If these
three things were not found, the Realized One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha would not arise in the world, and the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One would not shine in the world.
But since these three things are found, the Realized One, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha arises in the world, and the teaching and
training proclaimed by the Realized One shines in the world.

Without giving up three things you can't give up rebirth, old age, and
death. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. Without giving up these
three things you can't give up rebirth, old age, and death.

Without giving up three things you can't give up greed, hate, and
delusion. What three? Substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of
precepts and observances. Without giving up these three things you can't
give up greed, hate, and delusion.

Without giving up three things you can't give up substantialist view,
doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances. What three?
Irrational application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental
sluggishness. Without giving up these three things you can't give up
substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and
observances.

Without giving up three things you can't give up irrational application
of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. What three?
Unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered mind.
Without giving up these three things you can't give up irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.

Without giving up three things you can't give up unmindfulness, lack of
situational awareness, and scattered mind. What three? Not wanting to
see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones,
and a fault-finding mind. Without giving up these three things you can't
give up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered
mind.

Without giving up three things you can't give up not wanting to see the
noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. What three? Restlessness, lack of restraint, and
unethical conduct. Without giving up these three things you can't give
up not wanting to see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching
of the noble ones, and a fault-finding mind.

Without giving up three things you can't give up restlessness, lack of
restraint, and unethical conduct. What three? Faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. Without giving up these three things you
can't give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.

Without giving up three things you can't give up faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. What three? Disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. Without giving up these three things
you can't give up faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness.

Without giving up three things you can't give up disregard, being hard
to admonish, and having bad friends. What three? Lack of conscience,
imprudence, and negligence. Without giving up these three things you
can't give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.

Mendicants, someone who lacks conscience and prudence is negligent. When
you're negligent you can't give up disregard, being hard to admonish,
and having bad friends. When you've got bad friends you can't give up
faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness. When you're lazy you
can't give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.
When you're unethical you can't give up not wanting to see the noble
ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. When you've got a fault-finding mind you can't give
up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind.
When your mind is scattered you can't give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. When your mind is
sluggish you can't give up substantialist view, doubt, and
misapprehension of precepts and observances. When you have doubts you
can't give up greed, hate, and delusion. Without giving up greed, hate,
and delusion you can't give up rebirth, old age, and death.

After giving up three things you can give up rebirth, old age, and
death. What three? Greed, hate, and delusion. After giving up these
three things you can give up rebirth, old age, and death.

After giving up three things you can give up greed, hate, and delusion.
What three? Substantialist view, doubt, and misapprehension of precepts
and observances. After giving up these three things you can give up
greed, hate, and delusion.

After giving up three things you can give up substantialist view, doubt,
and misapprehension of precepts and observances. What three? Irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.
After giving up these three things you can give up substantialist view,
doubt, and misapprehension of precepts and observances.

After giving up three things you can give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. What three?
Unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind.
After giving up these three things you can give up irrational
application of mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness.

After giving up three things you can give up unmindfulness, lack of
situational awareness, and scattered mind. What three? Not wanting to
see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones,
and a fault-finding mind. After giving up these three things you can
give up unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and scattered
mind.

After giving up three things you can give up not wanting to see the
noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a
fault-finding mind. What three? Restlessness, lack of restraint, and
unethical conduct. After giving up these three things you can give up
not wanting to see the noble ones, not wanting to hear the teaching of
the noble ones, and a fault-finding mind.

After giving up three things you can give up restlessness, lack of
restraint, and unethical conduct. What three? Faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. After giving up these three things you
can give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct.

After giving up three things you can give up faithlessness,
uncharitableness, and laziness. What three? Disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. After giving up these three things you
can give up faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness.

After giving up three things you can give up disregard, being hard to
admonish, and having bad friends. What three? Lack of conscience,
imprudence, and negligence. After giving up these three things you can
give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and having bad friends.

Mendicants, someone who has conscience and prudence is diligent. When
you're diligent you can give up disregard, being hard to admonish, and
having bad friends. When you've got good friends you can give up
faithlessness, uncharitableness, and laziness. When you're energetic you
can give up restlessness, lack of restraint, and unethical conduct. When
you're ethical you can give up not wanting to see the noble ones, not
wanting to hear the teaching of the noble ones, and a fault-finding
mind. When you don't have a fault-finding mind you can give up
unmindfulness, lack of situational awareness, and a scattered mind. When
your mind isn't scattered you can give up irrational application of
mind, following a wrong path, and mental sluggishness. When your mind
isn't sluggish you can give up substantialist view, doubt, and
misapprehension of precepts and observances. When you have no doubts you
can give up greed, hate, and delusion. After giving up greed, hate, and
delusion you can give up rebirth, old age, and death."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.77 A Crow  *Kākasutta*

"Mendicants, a crow has ten bad qualities. What ten? They're rude and
impudent, gluttonous and voracious, cruel and pitiless, weak and
raucous, unmindful and acquisitive. A crow has these ten bad qualities.
In the same way, a bad mendicant has these ten bad qualities. What ten?
They're rude and impudent, gluttonous and voracious, cruel and pitiless,
weak and raucous, unmindful and acquisitive. A bad mendicant has these
ten bad qualities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.78 Jains  *Nigaṇṭhasutta*

"Mendicants, Jain ascetics have ten bad qualities. What ten? They're
faithless and unethical, without conscience or prudence, and devoted to
untrue persons. They glorify themselves and put others down. They're
attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go.
They're deceptive, with corrupt wishes and bad friends. Jain ascetics
have these ten bad qualities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.79 Grounds for Resentment  *Āghātavatthusutta*

"Mendicants, there are ten grounds for resentment. What ten? Thinking:
'They did wrong to me,' you harbor resentment. Thinking: 'They are doing
wrong to me' ... 'They will do wrong to me' ... 'They did wrong by
someone I love' ... 'They are doing wrong by someone I love' ... 'They
will do wrong by someone I love' ... 'They helped someone I dislike' ...
'They are helping someone I dislike' ... Thinking: 'They will help
someone I dislike,' you harbor resentment. You get angry for no reason.
These are the ten grounds for resentment."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.80 Getting Rid of Resentment  *Āghātapaṭivinayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these ten methods to get rid of resentment. What
ten? Thinking: 'They harmed me, but what can I possibly do?' you get rid
of resentment. Thinking: 'They are harming me ...' ... 'They will harm
me ...' ... 'They harmed someone I love ...' ... 'They are harming
someone I love ...' 'They will harm someone I love ...' ... They helped
someone I dislike ...' ... 'They are helping someone I dislike ...' ...
Thinking: 'They will help someone I dislike, but what can I possibly
do?' you get rid of resentment. And you don't get angry for no reason.
These are the ten ways of getting rid of resentment."

