# The Great Chapter

### AN 10.21 The Lion's Roar  *Sīhanādasutta*

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. Why is that? 'May I not
injure any little creatures on unclear ground.'

'Lion' is a term for the Realized One, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha. When the Realized One teaches Dhamma to an assembly,
this is his lion's roar.

The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel. What ten? Firstly, the Realized One truly
understands the possible as possible and the impossible as impossible.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
Relying on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of
practice lead. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many
and diverse elements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions
of sentient beings. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of
the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his
mind. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives. That
is: one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' Thus he
recollects his many past lives, with features and details. Since he
truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech,
and mind. They denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they
chose to act out of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. These dear beings, however, did good things by way of body,
speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble ones; they had right
view; and they chose to act out of that right view. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, he
sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He
understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly
understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One
possesses. With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.22 Hypotheses  *Adhivuttipadasutta*

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one
side. The Buddha said to him:

"Ānanda, I claim to be assured regarding the teachings that lead to
realizing by insight the various different hypotheses. So I am able to
teach the Dhamma in appropriate ways to different people. Practicing
accordingly, when something exists they'll know it exists. When it
doesn't exist they'll know it doesn't exist. When something is inferior
they'll know it's inferior. When it's superior they'll know it's
superior. When something is not supreme they'll know it's not supreme.
When it is supreme they'll know it's supreme. And they will know or see
or realize it in whatever way it should be known or seen or realized.
This is possible. But this is the unsurpassable knowledge, that is:
truly knowing each and every case. And Ānanda, I say that there is no
other knowledge better or finer than this.

The Realized One possesses ten powers of a Realized One. With these he
claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
turns the divine wheel. What ten? Firstly, the Realized One truly
understands the possible as possible, and the impossible as impossible.
Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized One.
Relying on this he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar in the
assemblies, and turns the divine wheel.

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the result of deeds
undertaken in the past, future, and present in terms of grounds and
causes. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands where all paths of
practice lead. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the world with its many
and diverse elements. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the diverse convictions
of sentient beings. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of
the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands the faculties of other
sentient beings and other individuals after comprehending them with his
mind. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the Realized
One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One truly understands corruption, cleansing,
and emergence regarding the absorptions, liberations, immersions, and
attainments. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One recollects many kinds of past lives, with
features and details. Since he truly understands this, this is a power
of the Realized One. ...

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Realized One sees sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. He understands how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds. Since he truly understands this, this is a power of the
Realized One. ...

Furthermore, the Realized One has realized the undefiled freedom of
heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized
it with his own insight due to the ending of defilements. Since he truly
understands this, this is a power of the Realized One. ...

These are the ten powers of a Realized One that the Realized One
possesses. With these he claims the bull's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and turns the divine wheel."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.23 Body  *Kāyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are things that should be given up by the body, not
by speech. There are things that should be given up by speech, not by
the body. There are things that should be given up neither by the body,
nor by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

And what are the things that should be given up by the body, not by
speech? It's when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of body. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say
this to them: 'Venerable, you've committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of body. Please give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good
bodily conduct.' When spoken to by their sensible spiritual companions
they give up that bad bodily conduct and develop good bodily conduct.
These are the things that should be given up by the body, not by speech.

And what are the things that should be given up by speech, not by the
body? It's when a mendicant has committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of speech. After examination, sensible spiritual companions say
this to them: 'Venerable, you've committed a certain unskillful offense
by way of speech. Please give up that bad verbal conduct and develop
good verbal conduct.' When spoken to by their sensible spiritual
companions they give up that bad verbal conduct and develop good verbal
conduct. These are the things that should be given up by speech, not by
the body.

And what are the things that should be given up neither by the body, nor
by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom? Greed ... hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... and
stinginess are things that should be given up neither by the body, nor
by speech, but by seeing again and again with wisdom.

Nasty jealousy should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech,
but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what is nasty jealousy?
It's when a householder or their child is prospering in money, grain,
silver, or gold. And a bondservant or dependent thinks: 'Oh, may that
householder or their child not prosper in money, grain, silver, or
gold!' Or an ascetic or brahmin receives robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick. And some other ascetic or brahmin
thinks: 'Oh, may that ascetic or brahmin not receive robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick.' This is called nasty
jealousy.

Corrupt wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech,
but by seeing again and again with wisdom. And what are corrupt wishes?
It's when a faithless person wishes to be known as faithful. An
unethical person wishes to be known as ethical. An unlearned person
wishes to be known as learned. A lover of company wishes to be known as
secluded. A lazy person wishes to be known as energetic. An unmindful
person wishes to be known as mindful. A person without immersion wishes
to be known as having immersion. A witless person wishes to be known as
wise. A person who has not ended the defilements wishes to be known as
having ended the defilements. These are called corrupt wishes. Corrupt
wishes should be given up neither by the body, nor by speech, but by
seeing again and again with wisdom.

Suppose that greed masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master them and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the
understanding that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and
keeps going. They don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes
master them and keep going.'

Suppose that greed does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or
that hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master
that mendicant and keep going. You should know of them: 'This venerable
has the understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master
them and keep going. They have the understanding that eliminates hate
... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ...
stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes
don't master them and keep going.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.24 By Mahācunda  *Mahācundasutta*

At one time Venerable Mahācunda was staying in the land of
the Cetīs at Sahajāti. There he addressed the
mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahācunda said this:

"Reverends, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge says: 'I
know this teaching, I see this teaching.' Suppose that greed masters
that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You should know
of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding that would
eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They don't have
the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of development says: 'I am developed
in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of both knowledge and development
says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am developed in
physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

Suppose a poor, needy, and penniless person was to declare themselves to
be rich, affluent, and wealthy. But when it came time to make a payment
they weren't able to come up with any money, grain, silver, or gold.
They would know of them: 'This person declares themselves to be rich,
affluent, and wealthy, but they are in fact poor, penniless, and needy.'
Why is that? Because when it came time to make a payment they weren't
able to come up with any money, grain, silver, or gold.

In the same way, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge and
development says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am
developed in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that
greed masters that mendicant and keeps going. Or that hate ... delusion
... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes master that mendicant and keep going. You
should know of them: 'This venerable does not have the understanding
that would eliminate greed, so greed masters them and keeps going. They
don't have the understanding that would eliminate hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes master them and keep
going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge says: 'I know this
teaching, I see this teaching.' Suppose that greed does not master that
mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep going. You should
know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding that eliminates
greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They have the
understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony
... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ... and
corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of development says: 'I am developed
in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed
does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion
... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding
that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They
have the understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

A mendicant who makes a declaration of both knowledge and development
says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am developed in
physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that greed does
not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ... delusion ...
anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty
jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and keep
going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the understanding
that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and keep going. They
have the understanding that eliminates hate ... delusion ... anger ...
acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess ... nasty jealousy ...
and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't master them and keep going.'

Suppose a rich, affluent, and wealthy person was to declare themselves
to be rich, affluent, and wealthy. And whenever it came time to make a
payment they were able to come up with the money, grain, silver, or
gold. They would know of them: 'This person declares themselves to be
rich, affluent, and wealthy, and they are in fact rich, affluent, and
wealthy.' Why is that? Because when it came time to make a payment they
were able to come up with the money, grain, silver, or gold.

In the same way, a mendicant who makes a declaration of knowledge and
development says: 'I know this teaching, I see this teaching. And I am
developed in physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom.' Suppose that
greed does not master that mendicant and keep going. Or that hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess
... nasty jealousy ... or corrupt wishes don't master that mendicant and
keep going. You should know of them: 'This venerable has the
understanding that eliminates greed, so greed doesn't master them and
keep going. They have the understanding that eliminates hate ...
delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt ... stinginess
... nasty jealousy ... and corrupt wishes, so corrupt wishes don't
master them and keep going.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.25 Meditation on Universals  *Kasiṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these ten universal dimensions of meditation.
What ten? Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above,
below, across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. These are the ten universal dimensions
of meditation."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.26 With Kāḷī  *Kāḷīsutta*

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land
of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

Then the laywoman Kāḷī of Kurughara went up to Venerable
Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, this was said by the Buddha in 'The Maidens' Questions':

> 'I've reached the goal, peace of heart.\
> Having conquered the army\
> \>of the likable and pleasant,\
> alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.\
> That's why I don't get too close to people,\
> and no-one gets too close to me.'

How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Sister, some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the
meditation on universal earth to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is the
goal', they are reborn. The Buddha directly knew the extent to which the
attainment of the meditation on universal earth was the ultimate.
Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the
escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what
is not the path. Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and the
escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and what
is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of heart.

Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the meditation on
universal water to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is the goal', they
are reborn. ... Some ascetics and brahmins regard the attainment of the
meditation on universal fire ... universal air ... universal blue ...
universal yellow ... universal red ... universal white ... universal
space ... universal consciousness to be the ultimate. Thinking 'this is
the goal', they are reborn. The Buddha directly knew the extent to which
the attainment of the meditation on universal consciousness was the
ultimate. Directly knowing this he saw the beginning, the drawback, and
the escape. And he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and
what is not the path. Because he saw the beginning, the drawback, and
the escape, and he saw the knowledge and vision of what is the path and
what is not the path, he knew that he had reached the goal, peace of
heart.

So, sister, that's how to understand the detailed meaning of what the
Buddha said in brief in 'The Maiden's Questions':

> 'I've reached the goal, peace of heart.\
> Having conquered the army\
> \>of the likable and pleasant,\
> alone, practicing absorption, I awakened to bliss.\
> That's why I don't get too close to people,\
> and no-one gets too close to me.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.27 The Great Questions (1st)  *Paṭhamamahāpañhāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then several mendicants robed up in the morning and, taking their bowls
and robes, entered Sāvatthī for alms. Then it occurred to
him, "It's too early to wander for alms in Sāvatthī. Why
don't we visit the monastery of the wanderers of other religions?"

Then they went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions and
exchanged greetings with the wanderers there. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, they sat down to one side. The wanderers
said to them:

"Reverends, the ascetic Gotama teaches his disciples like this: 'Please,
mendicants, directly know all things. Meditate having directly known all
things.' We too teach our disciples: 'Please, reverends, directly know
all things. Live having directly known all things.' What, then, is the
difference between the ascetic Gotama's teaching and instruction and
ours?"

Those mendicants neither approved nor dismissed that statement of the
wanderers of other religions. They got up from their seat, thinking, "We
will learn the meaning of this statement from the Buddha himself."

Then, after the meal, when they returned from almsround, they went up to
the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.

"Mendicants, when wanderers of other religions say this, you should say
to them: 'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer. Two ...
three ... four ... five ... six ... seven ... eight ... nine ... ten
things: question, summary recital, and answer.' Questioned like this,
the wanderers of other religions would be stumped, and, in addition,
would get frustrated. Why is that? Because they're out of their element.
I don't see anyone in this world---with its gods, Māras,
and Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods
and humans---who could provide a satisfying answer to these questions
except for the Realized One or his disciple or someone who has heard it
from them.

'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate,
and freed regarding one thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending
its meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life.
What one thing? 'All sentient beings are sustained by food.' Becoming
completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding this one
thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending its meaning, a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'One thing:
question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said, and this is
why I said it.

What two? Name and form. ...

What three? Three feelings. ...

What four? The four foods. ...

What five? The five grasping aggregates. ...

What six? The six interior sense fields. ...

What seven? The seven planes of consciousness. ...

What eight? The eight worldly conditions. ...

What nine? The nine abodes of sentient beings. ...

'Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said,
but why did I say it? Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate,
and freed regarding ten things, seeing their limits and fully
comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in
this very life. What ten? The ten ways of performing unskillful deeds.
Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding
these ten things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their
meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'Ten
things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what I said, and
this is why I said it."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.28 The Great Questions (2nd)  *Dutiyamahāpañhāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kajaṅgalā in a
bamboo grove. Then several lay followers of Kajaṅgalā went
to the nun Kajaṅgalikā, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to her:

"Ma'am, this was said by the Buddha in 'The Great Questions': 'One
thing: question, summary recital, and answer. Two ... three ... four ...
five ... six ... seven ... eight ... nine ... ten things: question,
summary recital, and answer.' How should we see the detailed meaning of
the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Good people, I haven't heard and learned this in the presence of the
Buddha or from esteemed mendicants. But as to how it seems to me, listen
and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, ma'am," replied the lay followers. The nun
Kajaṅgalikā said this:

"'One thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the
Buddha said, but why did he say it? Becoming completely disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding one thing, seeing its limits and
fully comprehending its meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering
in this very life. What one thing? 'All sentient beings are sustained by
food.' Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed
regarding this one thing, seeing its limits and fully comprehending its
meaning, a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'One
thing: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the Buddha
said, and this is why he said it.

What two? Name and form. ... What three? Three feelings. ...

With a mind well developed in four things---seeing their limits and
fully comprehending their meaning---a mendicant makes an end of
suffering in this very life. What four? The four kinds of mindfulness
meditation. ... With a mind well developed in these four things---seeing
their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a mendicant makes an
end of suffering in this very life. ...

What five? The five faculties. ... What six? The six elements of escape.
... What seven? The seven awakening factors. ... What eight? The noble
eightfold path. ...

Becoming completely disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding
nine things, seeing their limits and fully comprehending their meaning,
a mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. What nine? The
nine abodes of sentient beings. Becoming completely disillusioned,
dispassionate, and freed regarding these nine things, seeing their
limits and fully comprehending their meaning, a mendicant makes an end
of suffering in this very life.

'Ten things: question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the
Buddha said, but why did he say it? Becoming well developed in ten
things---seeing their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. What ten? The ten
ways of performing skillful deeds. With a mind well developed in these
ten things---seeing their limits and fully fathoming their meaning---a
mendicant makes an end of suffering in this very life. 'Ten things:
question, summary recital, and answer.' That's what the Buddha said, and
this is why he said it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of what the Buddha said in
brief in 'The Great Questions'. If you wish, you may go to the Buddha
and ask him about this. You should remember it in line with the Buddha's
answer."

"Yes, ma'am," replied those lay followers, approving and agreeing with
what the nun Kajaṅgalikā said. Then they got up from their
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled her, keeping her on their right.
Then they went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and informed
the Buddha of all they had discussed.

"Good, good, householders. The nun Kajaṅgalikā is astute,
she has great wisdom. If you came to me and asked this question, I would
answer it in exactly the same way as the nun Kajaṅgalikā.
That is what it means, and that's how you should remember it."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.29 Kosala (1st)  *Paṭhamakosalasutta*

"As far as Kāsi and Kosala extend, and as far as the
dominion of King Pasenadi of Kosala extends, King Pasenadi is said to be
the foremost. But even King Pasenadi decays and perishes.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

A galaxy extends a thousand times as far as the moon and sun revolve and
the shining ones light up the quarters. In that galaxy there are a
thousand moons, a thousand suns, a thousand Sinerus king of mountains, a
thousand Black Plum Tree Lands, a thousand Western Continents, a
thousand Northern Continents, a thousand Eastern Continents, four
thousand oceans, four thousand great kings, a thousand realms of the
gods of the four great kings, a thousand realms of the gods of the
thirty-three, of the gods of Yama, of the joyful gods, of the gods who
love to imagine, of the gods who control what is imagined by others, and
a thousand realms of divinity. As far as the galaxy extends, the Great
Divinity is said to be the foremost. But even the Great Divinity decays
and perishes.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There comes a time when this cosmos contracts. As it contracts, most
sentient beings migrate to the realm of streaming radiance. There they
are mind-made, feeding on rapture, self-luminous, wandering in midair,
steadily glorious, and they remain like that for a very long time. When
the cosmos is contracting, the gods of streaming radiance are said to be
the foremost. But even the gods of streaming radiance decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these ten universal dimensions of meditation. What ten?
Someone perceives the meditation on universal earth above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. They perceive the meditation on
universal water ... the meditation on universal fire ... the meditation
on universal air ... the meditation on universal blue ... the meditation
on universal yellow ... the meditation on universal red ... the
meditation on universal white ... the meditation on universal space ...
They perceive the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. These are the ten universal dimensions
of meditation.

The best of these ten universal dimensions of meditation is when someone
perceives the meditation on universal consciousness above, below,
across, undivided and limitless. Some sentient beings perceive like
this. But even the sentient beings who perceive like this decay and
perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these eight dimensions of mastery. What eight? Perceiving form
internally, someone sees forms externally, limited, both pretty and
ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the first
dimension of mastery.

Perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limitless,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the second dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, limited,
both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.'
This is the third dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally,
limitless, both pretty and ugly. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know
and see.' This is the fourth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, blue,
with blue color and blue appearance. They're like a flax flower that's
blue, with blue color and blue appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi
that's smoothed on both sides, blue, with blue color and blue
appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone
sees forms externally, blue, with blue color and blue appearance.
Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the fifth
dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, yellow,
with yellow color and yellow appearance. They're like a champak flower
that's yellow, with yellow color and yellow appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, yellow, with yellow color and
yellow appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally, yellow, with yellow color and yellow
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
sixth dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, red, with
red color and red appearance. They're like a scarlet mallow flower
that's red, with red color and red appearance. Or a cloth from Varanasi
that's smoothed on both sides, red, with red color and red appearance.
In the same way, not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms
externally, red, with red color and red appearance. Mastering them, they
perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the seventh dimension of mastery.

Not perceiving form internally, someone sees forms externally, white,
with white color and white appearance. They're like the morning star
that's white, with white color and white appearance. Or a cloth from
Varanasi that's smoothed on both sides, white, with white color and
white appearance. In the same way, not perceiving form internally,
someone sees forms externally, white, with white color and white
appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' This is the
eighth dimension of mastery. These are the eight dimensions of mastery.

The best of these dimensions of mastery is when someone, not perceiving
form internally, sees forms externally, white, with white color and
white appearance. Mastering them, they perceive: 'I know and see.' Some
sentient beings perceive like this. But even the sentient beings who
perceive like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are four ways of practice. What four?

1.  Painful practice with slow insight,

2.  painful practice with swift insight,

3.  pleasant practice with slow insight, and

4.  pleasant practice with swift insight.

These are the four ways of practice.

The best of these four ways of practice is the pleasant practice with
swift insight. Some sentient beings practice like this. But even the
sentient beings who practice like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are these four perceptions. What four?

1.  One person perceives the limited.

2.  One person perceives the expansive.

3.  One person perceives the limitless.

4.  One person, aware that 'there is nothing at all', perceives the
    dimension of nothingness.

These are the four perceptions.

The best of these four perceptions is when a person, aware that 'there
is nothing at all', perceives the dimension of nothingness. Some
sentient beings perceive like this. But even the sentient beings who
perceive like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

This is the best of the convictions of outsiders, that is: 'I might not
be, and it might not be mine. I will not be, and it will not be mine.'
When someone has such a view, you can expect that they will not be
attracted to continued existence, and they will not be repulsed by the
cessation of continued existence. Some sentient beings have such a view.
But even the sentient beings who have views like this decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who advocate the ultimate purity of
the spirit. This is the best of the advocates of the ultimate purity of
the spirit, that is, when someone, going totally beyond the dimension of
nothingness, enters and remains in the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception. They teach Dhamma in order to directly know and
realize this. Some sentient beings have such a doctrine. But even the
sentient beings who have such a doctrine decay and perish.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with it. Their
desire fades away even for the foremost, let alone the inferior.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who advocate ultimate
extinguishment in this very life. This is the best of those who advocate
extinguishment in this very life, that is, liberation by not grasping
after truly understanding the origin, ending, gratification, drawback,
and escape of the six fields of contact. Though I state and assert this,
certain ascetics and brahmins misrepresent me with the incorrect,
hollow, false, untruthful claim: 'The ascetic Gotama doesn't advocate
the complete understanding of sensual pleasures, forms, or feelings.'
But I do advocate the complete understanding of sensual pleasures,
forms, and feelings. And I advocate full extinguishment by not grasping
in this very life, wishless, quenched, and cooled."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.30 Kosala (2nd)  *Dutiyakosalasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Now at that time King Pasenadi of Kosala returned from combat after
winning a battle and succeeding in his objective. Then King Pasenadi of
Kosala went to the monastery. He went by carriage as far as the terrain
allowed, then descended and entered the monastery on foot.

At that time several mendicants were walking mindfully in the open air.
Then King Pasenadi of Kosala went up to them and said, "Sirs, where is
the Blessed One at present, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha? For I want to see the Buddha."

"Great king, that's his dwelling, with the door closed. Approach it
quietly, without hurrying; go onto the porch, clear your throat, and
knock on the door-panel. The Buddha will open the door."

So the king approached the Buddha's dwelling, cleared his throat and
knocked on the door-panel, and the Buddha opened the door. Then King
Pasenadi entered the Buddha's dwelling. He bowed with his head at the
Buddha's feet, caressing them and covering them with kisses, and
pronounced his name: "Sir, I am Pasenadi, king of Kosala! I am Pasenadi,
king of Kosala!"

"But great king, for what reason do you demonstrate such utmost devotion
for this body, conveying your manifest love?"

"Sir, it's because of my gratitude and thanks for the Buddha that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion, conveying my manifest love.

The Buddha is practicing for the welfare and happiness of the people. He
has established many people in the noble system, that is, the principles
of goodness and skillfulness. This is a reason that I demonstrate such
utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is ethical, possessing ethical conduct that is
mature, noble, and skillful. This is another reason that I demonstrate
such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha lives in the wilderness, frequenting remote
lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. This is another reason that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest
love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. This is another
reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying
my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world. This is another reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion
for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha gets to take part in talk about self-effacement
that helps open the heart, when he wants, without trouble or difficulty.
That is, talk about fewness of wishes, contentment, seclusion,
aloofness, arousing energy, ethics, immersion, wisdom, freedom, and the
knowledge and vision of freedom. This is another reason that I
demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest
love.

Furthermore, the Buddha gets the four absorptions---blissful meditations
in this life that belong to the higher mind---when he wants, without
trouble or difficulty. This is another reason that I demonstrate such
utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha recollects many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. He remembers: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so he
recollects his many kinds of past lives, with features and details. This
is another reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the
Buddha, conveying my manifest love.

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, the
Buddha sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. He
understands how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' He understands how
sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds. This is another
reason that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying
my manifest love.

Furthermore, the Buddha has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
his own insight due to the ending of defilements. This is another reason
that I demonstrate such utmost devotion for the Buddha, conveying my
manifest love.

Well, now, sir, I must go. I have many duties, and much to do."

"Please, great king, go at your convenience." Then King Pasenadi got up
from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on his right, before leaving.

