# The Chapter on Similarity

### AN 10.221 Untitled Discourse on Ten Qualities  *\~*

"Someone with ten qualities is cast down to hell. What ten? They kill
living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. Someone with these ten qualities is cast
down to hell.

Someone with ten qualities is raised up to heaven. What ten? They don't
kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't
use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. Someone with these ten
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.222 Untitled Discourse on Twenty Qualities  *\~*

"Someone with twenty qualities is cast down to hell. What twenty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. And they encourage others to do these
things. Someone with these twenty qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with twenty qualities is raised up to heaven. What twenty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. And they encourage others to
do these things. Someone with these twenty qualities is raised up to
heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.223 Untitled Discourse on Thirty Qualities  *\~*

"Someone with thirty qualities is cast down to hell. What thirty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. They encourage others to do these things.
And they approve of these things. Someone with these thirty qualities is
cast down to hell.

Someone with thirty qualities is raised up to heaven. What thirty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. They encourage others to do
these things. And they approve of these things. Someone with these
thirty qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.224 Untitled Discourse on Forty Qualities  *\~*

"Someone with forty qualities is cast down to hell. What forty? They
kill living creatures, steal, and commit sexual misconduct. They use
speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're covetous,
malicious, with wrong view. They encourage others to do these things.
They approve of these things. And they praise these things. Someone with
these forty qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with forty qualities is raised up to heaven. What forty? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. They encourage others to do
these things. They approve of these things. And they praise these
things. Someone with these forty qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.225--228 Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (1st)  *\~*

"Someone with ten qualities keeps themselves broken and damaged ...
keeps themselves intact and unscathed ... twenty ... thirty ... forty
..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.229--232 Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (2nd)  *\~*

"When they have ten qualities, some people, when their body breaks up,
after death, are reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld,
hell. ... some people, when their body breaks up, after death, are
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm ... twenty ... thirty ... forty
..."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.233--236 Untitled Discourses on Ten to Forty Qualities (3rd)  *\~*

"A fool is known by ten qualities ... astute person ... twenty ...
thirty ... forty ..."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning With Greed

### AN 10.237 Untitled Discourse on Greed (1st)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? The
perceptions of ugliness, death, repulsiveness of food, dissatisfaction
with the whole world, impermanence, suffering in impermanence, and
not-self in suffering, giving up, fading away, and cessation. For
insight into greed, these ten things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.238 Untitled Discourse on Greed (2nd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? The
perceptions of impermanence, not-self, repulsiveness of food,
dissatisfaction with the whole world, a skeleton, a worm-infested
corpse, a livid corpse, a festering corpse, a split open corpse, and a
bloated corpse. For insight into greed, these ten things should be
developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.239 Untitled Discourse on Greed (3rd)  *\~*

"For insight into greed, ten things should be developed. What ten? Right
view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, right immersion, right knowledge, and right
freedom. For insight into greed, these ten things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.240--266 Untitled Discourses on Greed  *\~*

"For the complete understanding of greed ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go ... these ten things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.267--746 Untitled Discourses on Hate, Etc.  *\~*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceitfulness ... deviousness ...
obstinacy ... aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... for
the complete understanding of negligence ... complete ending ... giving
up ... ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving
away ... letting go of negligence ... these ten things should be
developed."


# The Book of the Elevens


