# Another Chapter on Persons

### AN 10.199--210 Should Not Associate, Etc.  *Aparapuggalavagga*

"Mendicants, you should not associate with a person who has ten
qualities. What ten? They kill living creatures, steal, and commit
sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or
nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, with wrong view. You
should not associate with a person who has these ten qualities.

You should associate with a person who has ten qualities. What ten? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. You should associate with a
person who has these ten qualities."

"Mendicants, you should not frequent a person who has ten qualities ...
You should frequent ..." "You should not pay homage ... You should pay
homage ..." "You should not venerate ... You should venerate ..." "You
should not praise ... You should praise ..." "You should not revere ...
You should revere ..." "You should not defer to ... You should defer to
..." "A person is not a success ... A person is a success ..." "A person
is not pure ... A person is pure ..." "A person does not win over
conceit ... A person wins over conceit ..." "A person does not grow in
wisdom ... A person grows in wisdom ..."

"A person who has these ten qualities creates much wickedness. ... A
person who has these ten qualities creates much merit. What ten? They
don't kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They
don't use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. They're
contented, kind-hearted, with right view. A person who has these ten
qualities creates much merit."


