# The Chapter on the Noble Path

### AN 10.189 The Noble Path  *Ariyamaggasutta*

"I will teach you the noble path and the ignoble path. ... And what is
the ignoble path? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is
called the ignoble path.

And what is the noble path? Not killing living creatures ... right view.
This is called the noble path."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.190 The Dark Path  *Kaṇhamaggasutta*

"I will teach you the dark path and the bright path. ... And what is the
dark path? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the
dark path.

And what is the bright path? Not killing living creatures ... right
view. This is called the bright path."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.191 The True Teaching  *Saddhammasutta*

"I will teach you what is the true teaching and what is not the true
teaching. ... And what is not the true teaching? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called what is not the true teaching.

And what is the true teaching? Not killing living creatures ... right
view. This is called the true teaching."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.192 The Teaching of the True Persons  *Sappurisadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the teaching of the true persons and the
teaching of the untrue persons. And what is the teaching of the untrue
persons? Killing living creatures ... wrong view. This is the teaching
of the untrue persons.

And what is the teaching of the true persons? Not killing living
creatures ... right view. This is the teaching of the true persons."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.193 Principles That Should Be Activated  *Uppādetabbadhammasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to activate and the principle not to
activate. ... And what is the principle not to activate? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to activate.

And what is the principle to activate? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to activate."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.194 Principles That Should Be Cultivated  *Āsevitabbadhammasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to cultivate and the principle not to
cultivate. ... And what is the principle not to cultivate? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
cultivate.

And what is the principle to cultivate? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to cultivate."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.195 Principles That Should Be Developed  *Bhāvetabbadhammasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to develop and the principle not to
develop. ... Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. And what is
the principle not to develop? Killing living creatures ... wrong view.
This is called the principle not to develop.

And what is the principle to develop? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to develop."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.196 Principles That Should Be Made Much Of  *Bahulīkātabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to make much of and the principle not to
make much of. ... And what is the principle not to make much of? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
make much of.

And what is the principle to make much of? Not killing living creatures
... right view. This is called the principle to make much of."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.197 Should Be Recollected  *Anussaritabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to recollect and the principle not to
recollect. ... And what is the principle not to recollect? Killing
living creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to
recollect.

And what is the principle to recollect? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to recollect."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.198 Should Be Realized  *Sacchikātabbasutta*

"I will teach you the principle to realize and the principle not to
realize. ... And what is the principle not to realize? Killing living
creatures ... wrong view. This is called the principle not to realize.

And what is the principle to realize? Not killing living creatures ...
right view. This is called the principle to realize."

