# The Chapter with Upāli

### AN 10.91 Pleasure Seekers  *Kāmabhogīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to
one side. Seated to one side, the Buddha said to the householder
Anāthapiṇḍika:

"These ten pleasure seekers are found in the world. What ten? First, a
pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. They
don't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
They make themselves happy and pleased, but don't share it and make
merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and make
merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They don't make themselves
happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They make themselves happy
and pleased, but don't share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They make themselves happy
and pleased, and they share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They don't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and
make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, but don't share it and
make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and
make merit. But they enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated, attached, blind
to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They make themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and
make merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached,
seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, nor
share it and make merit. They may be criticized on three grounds. They
seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is the first
ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy and pleased. This
is the second ground for criticism. They don't share it and make merit.
This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may be
criticized on these three grounds.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't
share it and make merit. They may be criticized on two grounds, and
praised on one. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the one ground for praise. They don't share it and make
merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may
be criticized on these two grounds, and praised on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares
it and makes merit. They may be criticized on one ground, and praised on
two. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is
the one ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and pleased.
This is the first ground for praise. They share it and make merit. This
is the second ground for praise. This pleasure seeker may be criticized
on this one ground, and praised on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, nor share it and make merit.
They may be praised on one ground, and criticized on three. They seek
for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the one ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the second ground for criticism. They don't share
it and make merit. This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on these three.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
makes themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't share it and make merit.
They may be praised on two grounds, and criticized on two. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the first ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They don't share it and
make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares it and make merit. They
may be praised on three grounds, and criticized on one. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They seek for wealth using illegitimate, coercive means.
This is the one ground for criticism. They make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They share it and make
merit. This is the third ground for praise. This pleasure seeker may be
praised on these three grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased,
nor share it and make merit. They may be praised on one ground and
criticized on two. They seek for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the one ground for praise. They don't make themselves
happy and pleased. This is the first ground for criticism. They don't
share it and make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This
pleasure seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on
these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but
doesn't share it and make merit. They may be praised on two grounds and
criticized on one. They seek for wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the first ground for praise. They make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They don't share it
and make merit. This is the one ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. But they enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated,
attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. They
may be praised on three grounds and criticized on one. They seek for
wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground
for praise. They make themselves happy and pleased. This is the second
ground for praise. They share it and make merit. This is the third
ground for praise. They enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated, attached,
blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. This is the
one ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may be praised on these
three grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied,
uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the
escape. They may be praised on four grounds. They seek for wealth using
legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first ground for praise.
They make themselves happy and pleased. This is the second ground for
praise. They share it and make merit. This is the third ground for
praise. They enjoy that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing
the drawbacks, and understanding the escape. This is the fourth ground
for praise. This pleasure seeker may be praised on these four grounds.

These are the ten pleasure seekers found in the world. The pleasure
seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means, who makes
themselves happy and pleased, and shares it and makes merit, and who
uses that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks,
and understanding the escape is the foremost, best, chief, highest, and
finest of the ten. From a cow comes milk, from milk comes curds, from
curds come butter, from butter comes ghee, and from ghee comes cream of
ghee. And the cream of ghee is said to be the best of these.

In the same way, the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, who makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares
it and makes merit, and who uses that wealth untied, uninfatuated,
unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the escape is the
foremost, best, chief, highest, and finest of the ten."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.92 Dangers  *Bhayasutta*

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika went up to the Buddha,
bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Householder, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and
threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and
comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish,
declare of themselves: 'I've finished with rebirth in hell, the animal
realm, and the ghost realm. I've finished with all places of loss, bad
places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be
reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.'

What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled? Anyone who
kills living creatures creates dangers and threats both in this life and
in lives to come, and experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures creates no dangers and threats
either in this life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental
pain and sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who
refrains from killing living creatures.

Anyone who steals ... Anyone who commits sexual misconduct ... Anyone
who lies ... Anyone who consumes beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants
creates dangers and threats both in this life and in lives to come, and
experiences mental pain and sadness. Anyone who refrains from consuming
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants creates no dangers and threats either
in this life or in lives to come, and doesn't experience mental pain and
sadness. So that danger and threat is quelled for anyone who refrains
from consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are the five
dangers and threats they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have? It's when a
noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha: 'That Blessed
One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' They have
experiential confidence in the teaching: 'The teaching is well explained
by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.' They have experiential confidence in the
Saṅgha: 'The Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples
is practicing the way that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It
consists of the four pairs, the eight individuals. This is the
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples that is worthy of
offerings dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a
religious donation, worthy of greeting with joined palms, and is the
supreme field of merit for the world.' And a noble disciple's ethical
conduct is loved by the noble ones, unbroken, impeccable, spotless, and
unmarred, liberating, praised by sensible people, not mistaken, and
leading to immersion. These are the four factors of stream-entry that
they have.

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and
comprehended with wisdom? It's when a noble disciple reflects: 'When
this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises. When this
doesn't exist, that is not; due to the cessation of this, that ceases.
That is: Ignorance is a condition for choices. Choices are a condition
for consciousness. Consciousness is a condition for name and form. Name
and form are conditions for the six sense fields. The six sense fields
are conditions for contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling
is a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping.
Grasping is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is
a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is
how this entire mass of suffering originates. When ignorance fades away
and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease. When choices cease,
consciousness ceases. When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.
When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease. When the six sense
fields cease, contact ceases. When contact ceases, feeling ceases. When
feeling ceases, craving ceases. When craving ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases.' This is the noble system that
they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom.

When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four
factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble
cycle with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves: 'I've
finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm.
I've finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am
a stream-enterer! I'm not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am
bound for awakening.'"

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.93 What Is Your View?  *Kiṁdiṭṭhikasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then the householder Anāthapiṇḍika left
Sāvatthī in the middle of the day to see the Buddha. Then
it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he's in
retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants, as
they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the monastery of the wanderers of
other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions. Now
at that time, the wanderers of other religions had come together, making
an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of
low topics.

They saw Anāthapiṇḍika coming off in the distance, and
stopped each other, saying, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound.
The householder Anāthapiṇḍika, a disciple of the ascetic
Gotama, is coming into our monastery. He is included among the
white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing in
Sāvatthī. Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to
be quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly
is quiet he'll see fit to approach."

Then those wanderers of other religions fell silent. Then
Anāthapiṇḍika went up to them, and exchanged greetings with
those wanderers. When the greetings and polite conversation were over,
he sat down to one side. The wanderers said to him, "Tell us,
householder, what is the view of the ascetic Gotama?"

"Sirs, I don't know all his views."

"Well then, since it seems you don't know all the views of the ascetic
Gotama, tell us, what are the views of the mendicants?"

"Sirs, I don't know all the mendicants' views."

"Well then, since it seems you don't know all the views of the ascetic
Gotama or of the mendicants, tell us, householder, what is your view?"

"Sirs, it's not hard for me to explain what my views are. But please,
let the venerables explain their own convictions first. Afterwards it
won't be hard for me to explain my views."

When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him, "The cosmos is
eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my
view, householder."

Another wanderer said, "The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile. That's my view, householder."

Another wanderer said, "The cosmos is finite ..." ... "The cosmos is
infinite ..." ... "The soul and the body are the same thing ..." ...
"The soul and the body are different things ..." ... "A realized one
still exists after death ..." ... "A realized one no longer exists after
death ..." ... "A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ..." ... "A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my
view, householder."

When this was said, Anāthapiṇḍika said this, "Sirs,
regarding the venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is eternal. This is
the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my view, householder.'
This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational application
of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But that view is
created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated. Anything that is
created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently originated is impermanent.
And what's impermanent is suffering. What he clings to and holds to is
just suffering.

Regarding the venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This
is the only truth, anything else is futile. That's my view,
householder.' This view of his has either arisen from his own irrational
application of mind, or is conditioned by what someone else says. But
that view is created, conditioned, chosen, dependently originated.
Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. What he
clings to and holds to is just suffering.

Regarding the venerable who said this: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ...
'The cosmos is infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same
thing ...' ... 'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A
realized one still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer
exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor
doesn't exist after death. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile. That's my view, householder.' This view of his has either arisen
from his own irrational application of mind, or is conditioned by what
someone else says. But that view is created, conditioned, chosen,
dependently originated. Anything that is created, conditioned, chosen,
and dependently originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is
suffering. What he clings to and holds to is just suffering."

When he said this the wanderers said to him, "Householder, we've each
explained our own convictions. Tell us, householder, what is your view?"

"Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. And
what's suffering is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self. That's
my view, sirs."

"Householder, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and
dependently originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is
suffering. What you cling to and hold to is just suffering."

"Sirs, anything that is created, conditioned, chosen, and dependently
originated is impermanent. And what's impermanent is suffering. And I've
truly seen clearly with right wisdom that what's suffering is not mine,
I am not this, it's not my self. And I truly understand the escape
beyond that."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. Seeing this,
Anāthapiṇḍika got up from his seat. He went to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had
discussed.

"Good, good, householder! That's how you should legitimately and
completely refute those futile men from time to time."

Then the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired the
householder Anāthapiṇḍika with a Dhamma talk, after which
Anāthapiṇḍika got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha before leaving.

Then, not long after Anāthapiṇḍika had left, the Buddha
addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, even a mendicant who has ordained
for a hundred years in this teaching and training would legitimately and
completely refute those wanderers of other religions just as the
householder Anāthapiṇḍika did."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.94 With Vajjiyamāhita  *Vajjiyamāhitasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Campā on the banks
of the Gaggarā Lotus Pond.

Then the householder Vajjiyamāhita left
Sāvatthī in the middle of the day to see the Buddha. Then
it occurred to him, "It's the wrong time to see the Buddha, as he's in
retreat. And it's the wrong time to see the esteemed mendicants, as
they're in retreat. Why don't I visit the monastery of the wanderers of
other religions?"

Then he went to the monastery of the wanderers of other religions. Now
at that time, the wanderers of other religions had come together, making
an uproar, a dreadful racket as they sat and talked about all kinds of
low topics.

They saw Vajjiyamāhita coming off in the distance, and
stopped each other, saying, "Be quiet, good sirs, don't make a sound.
The householder Vajjiyamāhita, a disciple of the ascetic
Gotama, is coming into our monastery. He is included among the
white-clothed lay disciples of the ascetic Gotama, who is residing near
Campā. Such venerables like the quiet, are educated to be
quiet, and praise the quiet. Hopefully if he sees that our assembly is
quiet he'll see fit to approach."

Then those wanderers of other religions fell silent. Then
Vajjiyamāhita went up to them, and exchanged greetings with
the wanderers there. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side. The wanderers said to him:

"Is it really true, householder? Does the ascetic Gotama criticize all
forms of mortification? Does he categorically condemn and denounce those
fervent mortifiers who live rough?"

"No, sirs, the Buddha does not criticize all forms of mortification. Nor
does he categorically condemn and denounce those fervent mortifiers who
live rough. The Buddha criticizes where it is due, and praises where it
is due. In doing so he is one who speaks after analyzing the question,
and is not one-sided on this point."

When he said this, one of the wanderers said to him, "Hold on,
householder! That ascetic Gotama who you praise is an exterminator who
refrains from making statements."

"On this point, also, I reasonably respond to the venerables. The Buddha
has stated 'This is skillful' and 'This is unskillful'. So when it comes
to what is skillful and unskillful the Buddha makes a statement. He is
not an exterminator who refrains from making statements."

When this was said, those wanderers sat silent, dismayed, shoulders
drooping, downcast, depressed, with nothing to say. Seeing this,
Vajjiyamāhita got up from his seat. He went to the Buddha,
bowed, sat down to one side, and informed the Buddha of all they had
discussed.

"Good, good, householder! That's how you should legitimately and
completely refute those futile men from time to time. Householder, I
don't say that all mortifications should be undergone. But I don't say
that no mortifications should be undergone. I don't say that all
observances should be undertaken. But I don't say that no observances
should be undertaken. I don't say that all efforts should be tried. But
I don't say that no efforts should be tried. I don't say that everything
should be given up. But I don't say that nothing should be given up. I
don't say that you should be liberated with all kinds of freedom. But I
don't say that you should not be liberated with any kind of freedom.

When undergoing certain mortifications, unskillful qualities grow while
skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't undergo those
mortifications. When undergoing certain mortifications, unskillful
qualities decline while skillful qualities grow. I say that you should
undergo those mortifications.

When undertaking certain observances, unskillful qualities grow while
skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't undertake those
observances. When undertaking certain observances, unskillful qualities
decline while skillful qualities grow. I say that you should undertake
those observances.

When trying certain efforts, unskillful qualities grow while skillful
qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't try those efforts. When
trying certain efforts, unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow. I say that you should try those efforts.

When giving up certain things, unskillful qualities grow while skillful
qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't give up those things. When
giving up certain things, unskillful qualities decline while skillful
qualities grow. I say that you should give up those things.

When being liberated with certain kinds of freedom, unskillful qualities
grow while skillful qualities decline. I say that you shouldn't be
liberated with those kinds of freedom. When being liberated with certain
kinds of freedom, unskillful qualities decline while skillful qualities
grow. I say that you should be liberated with those kinds of freedom."

After Vajjiyamāhita had been educated, encouraged, fired
up, and inspired with a Dhamma talk by the Buddha, he got up from his
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha before leaving.

Then, not long after Vajjiyamāhita had left, the Buddha
addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, even a mendicant who for a long
time has had little dust in their eye in this teaching and training
would legitimately and completely refute those wanderers of other
religions just as the householder Vajjiyamāhita did."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.95 With Uttiya  *Uttiyasutta*

Then the wanderer Uttiya went up to the Buddha, and exchanged greetings
with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to the Buddha, "Mister Gotama, is this right: 'The cosmos
is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"Then is this right: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"Then is this right: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is
infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same thing ...' ...
'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A realized one
still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer exists after
death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"This has not been declared by me, Uttiya."

"When asked about all these points, Mister Gotama says that they have
not been declared by him.

So what exactly has been declared by Mister Gotama?"

"Uttiya, I teach my disciples from my own insight in order to purify
sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain
and sadness, to end the cycle of suffering, and to realize
extinguishment."

"But when Mister Gotama teaches in this way, is the whole world saved,
or half, or a third?" But when he said this, the Buddha kept silent.

Then Venerable Ānanda thought, "The wanderer Uttiya must not get the
harmful misconception: 'When the ascetic Gotama was asked this
all-important question he falters without answering. He just can't do
it!' That would be for his lasting harm and suffering."

Then Ānanda said to the wanderer Uttiya, "Well then, Reverend Uttiya, I
shall give you a simile. For by means of a simile some sensible people
understand the meaning of what is said. Suppose there was a king's
frontier citadel with fortified embankments, ramparts, and arches, and a
single gate. And it has a gatekeeper who is astute, competent, and
clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known people in. As he walks
around the patrol path, he doesn't see a hole or cleft in the wall, not
even one big enough for a cat to slip out. He doesn't know how many
creatures enter or leave the citadel. But he does know that whatever
sizable creatures enter or leave the citadel, all of them do so via this
gate.

In the same way, it's not the Realized One's concern whether the whole
world is saved by this, or half, or a third. But the Realized One knows
that whoever is saved from the world---whether in the past, the future,
or the present---all have given up the five hindrances, corruptions of
the heart that weaken wisdom. They have firmly established their mind in
the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. And they have truly developed
the seven awakening factors. That's how they're saved from the world, in
the past, future, or present. Uttiya, you were just asking the Buddha
the same question as before in a different way. That's why he didn't
answer."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.96 With Kokanada  *Kokanudasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Rājagaha in
the Hot Springs Monastery. Then Ānanda rose at the crack of dawn and
went to the hot springs to bathe. When he had bathed and emerged from
the water he stood in one robe drying his limbs. The wanderer Kokanada
also rose at the crack of dawn and went to the hot springs to bathe.

He saw Ānanda coming off in the distance and said to him, "Who's here,
reverend?"

"I'm a mendicant, reverend."

"Of which mendicants?"

"Of the ascetics who follow the Sakyan."

"I'd like to ask the venerable about a certain point, if you'd take the
time to answer."

"Ask, reverend. When I've heard it I'll know."

"Is this your view: 'The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth,
anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the only
truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then is this your view: 'The cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is
infinite ...' ... 'The soul and the body are the same thing ...' ...
'The soul and the body are different things ...' ... 'A realized one
still exists after death ...' ... 'A realized one no longer exists after
death ...' ... 'A realized one both still exists and no longer exists
after death ...' ... 'A Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist
after death. This is the only truth, anything else is futile'?"

"That's not my view, reverend."

"Then, sir, do you neither know nor see?"

"That's not so, reverend. I do know and see."

"When asked about all these points, you say that's not your view.

Yet when asked whether you neither know nor see, you say, 'That's not
so, reverend. I do know and see.' How then should we see the meaning of
this statement?"

"'The cosmos is eternal. This is the only truth, anything else is
futile:' that's a misconception. 'The cosmos is not eternal. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile:' that's a misconception. 'The
cosmos is finite ...' ... 'The cosmos is infinite ...' ... 'The soul and
the body are the same thing ...' ... 'The soul and the body are
different things ...' ... 'A realized one still exists after death ...'
... 'A realized one no longer exists after death ...' ... 'A realized
one both still exists and no longer exists after death ...' ... 'A
Realized One neither exists nor doesn't exist after death. This is the
only truth, anything else is futile:' that's a misconception.

I know and see the scope of convictions, the scope of grounds for views,
fixation on views, obsession with views, the origin of views, and the
uprooting of views. Knowing and seeing thus, why should I say: 'I
neither know nor see?' I do know and see."

"What is the venerable's name? And how are you known among your
spiritual companions?"

"Reverend, my name is Ānanda. And that's how I'm known among my
spiritual companions."

"Goodness! I had no idea I was consulting such a great tutor as
Venerable Ānanda! If I had known who you were, I wouldn't have said so
much. May Venerable Ānanda please forgive me."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.97 Worthy of Offerings Dedicated to the Gods  *Āhuneyyasutta*

"Mendicants, a mendicant with ten qualities is worthy of offerings
dedicated to the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious
donation, worthy of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme
field of merit for the world. What ten?

It's when a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally scrutinizing them, and
comprehending them theoretically.

They have good friends, companions, and associates.

They have right view, possessing right perspective.

They wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying themselves and
becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going unobstructed
through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through space; diving in
and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on water as if it were
earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a bird; touching and
stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty and powerful. They
control the body as far as the realm of divinity.

With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, they hear both kinds
of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.

They understand the minds of other beings and individuals, having
comprehended them with their own mind. They understand mind with greed
as 'mind with greed', and mind without greed as 'mind without greed'.
They understand mind with hate ... mind without hate ... mind with
delusion ... mind without delusion ... constricted mind ... scattered
mind ... expansive mind ... unexpansive mind ... mind that is not
supreme ... mind that is supreme ... mind immersed in
samādhi ... mind not immersed in samādhi ...
freed mind ... They understand unfreed mind as 'unfreed mind'.

They recollect many kinds of past lives, that is, one, two, three, four,
five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand, a
hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world contracting, many eons
of the world expanding, many eons of the world contracting and
expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my clan was that, I
looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt pleasure and
pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away from that place
I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was named this, my clan was
that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I felt
pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed away
from that place I was reborn here.' Thus they recollect their many past
lives, with features and details.

With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient
beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful
and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. 'These dear beings did bad
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They denounced the noble ones;
they had wrong view; and they chose to act out of that wrong view. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a
bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear beings, however, did good
things by way of body, speech, and mind. They never denounced the noble
ones; they had right view; and they chose to act out of that right view.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a good place,
a heavenly realm.' And so, with clairvoyance that is purified and
superhuman, they see sentient beings passing away and being
reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a
bad place. They understand how sentient beings are reborn according to
their deeds.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A mendicant with these ten qualities is worthy of offerings dedicated to
the gods, worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy
of veneration with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for
the world."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.98 A Senior Mendicant  *Therasutta*

"Mendicants, a senior mendicant with ten qualities lives comfortably in
whatever region they live. What ten?

They are senior and have long gone forth.

They're ethical, restrained in the monastic code, conducting themselves
well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the
slightest fault, they keep the rules they've undertaken.

They're very learned, remembering and keeping what they've learned.
These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned in such teachings,
remembering them, reinforcing them by recitation, mentally scrutinizing
them, and comprehending them theoretically.

Both monastic codes have been passed down to them in detail, well
analyzed, well mastered, well evaluated in both the rules and
accompanying material.

They're skilled in raising and settling disciplinary issues.

They love the teachings and are a delight to converse with, being full
of joy in the teaching and training.

They're content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and
medicines and supplies for the sick.

They look impressive when going out and coming back, and are well
restrained when sitting in an inhabited area.

They get the four absorptions---blissful meditations in this life that
belong to the higher mind---when they want, without trouble or
difficulty.

They realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in
this very life, and they live having realized it with their own insight
due to the ending of defilements.

A senior mendicant with these ten qualities lives comfortably in
whatever region they live."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.99 With Upāli  *Upālisutta*

Then Venerable Upāli went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, I wish to frequent remote lodgings
in the wilderness and the forest."

"Upāli, remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest
are challenging. It's hard to maintain seclusion and hard to find joy in
it. Staying alone, the forests seem to rob the mind of a mendicant who
isn't immersed in samādhi. If someone should say this,
'Though I don't have immersion, I'm going to frequent remote lodgings in
the wilderness and the forest.' You can expect that they'll sink down or
float away.

Suppose there was a large lake, and along comes a bull elephant with a
height of seven or eight cubits. He'd think, 'Why don't I plunge into
this lake and play around while washing my ears and back? When I've
bathed and drunk, I'll emerge from the water and go wherever I want.'
And that's just what he does. Why is that? Because his large life-form
finds a footing in the depths.

Then along comes a rabbit or a cat. They'd think, 'What difference is
there between me and a bull elephant? Why don't I plunge into this lake
and play around while washing my ears and back? When I've bathed and
drunk, I'll emerge from the water and go wherever I want.' They jump
into the lake rashly, without thinking. You can expect that they'll sink
down or float away. Why is that? Because their little life-form finds no
footing in the depths. If someone should say this, 'Though I don't have
immersion, I'm going to frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and
the forest.' You can expect that they'll sink down or float away.

Suppose there was a little baby boy playing in his own urine and feces.
What do you think, Upāli? Isn't that a totally foolish
game?"

"Yes, sir."

"After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature. He
accordingly plays childish games such as toy plows, tip-cat,
somersaults, pinwheels, toy measures, toy carts, and toy bows. What do
you think, Upāli? Aren't such games better than what he did
before?"

"Yes, sir."

"After some time that boy grows up and his faculties mature further. He
accordingly amuses himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
sensual stimulation. Sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. Sounds known by
the ear ... Smells known by the nose ... Tastes known by the tongue ...
Touches known by the body, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. What do you think, Upāli?
Aren't such games better than what he did before?"

"Yes, sir."

"But then a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. He has realized with his own insight this
world---with its gods, Māras, and divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---and he
makes it known to others. He proclaims a teaching that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and
well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's entirely full
and pure.

A householder hears that teaching, or a householder's child, or someone
reborn in a good family. They gain faith in the Realized One and
reflect, 'Living in a house is cramped and dirty, but the life of one
gone forth is wide open. It's not easy for someone living at home to
lead the spiritual life utterly full and pure, like a polished shell.
Why don't I shave off my hair and beard, dress in ocher robes, and go
forth from the lay life to homelessness?'

After some time they give up a large or small fortune, and a large or
small family circle. They shave off hair and beard, dress in ocher
robes, and go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

Once they've gone forth, they take up the training and livelihood of the
mendicants. They give up killing living creatures, renouncing the rod
and the sword. They're scrupulous and kind, living full of sympathy for
all living beings.

They give up stealing. They take only what's given, and expect only
what's given. They keep themselves clean by not thieving.

They give up unchastity. They are celibate, set apart, avoiding the
vulgar act of sex.

They give up lying. They speak the truth and stick to the truth. They're
honest and dependable, and don't trick the world with their words.

They give up divisive speech. They don't repeat in one place what they
heard in another so as to divide people against each other. Instead,
they reconcile those who are divided, supporting unity, delighting in
harmony, loving harmony, speaking words that promote harmony.

They give up harsh speech. They speak in a way that's mellow, pleasing
to the ear, lovely, going to the heart, polite, likable and agreeable to
the people.

They give up talking nonsense. Their words are timely, true, and
meaningful, in line with the teaching and training. They say things at
the right time which are valuable, reasonable, succinct, and beneficial.

They refrain from injuring plants and seeds. They eat in one part of the
day, abstaining from eating at night and food at the wrong time. They
refrain from seeing shows of dancing, singing, and music . They refrain
from beautifying and adorning themselves with garlands, fragrance, and
makeup. They refrain from high and luxurious beds. They refrain from
receiving gold and currency, raw grains, raw meat, women and girls, male
and female bondservants, goats and sheep, chickens and pigs, elephants,
cows, horses, and mares, and fields and land. They refrain from running
errands and messages; buying and selling; falsifying weights, metals, or
measures; bribery, fraud, cheating, and duplicity; mutilation, murder,
abduction, banditry, plunder, and violence.

They're content with robes to look after the body and almsfood to look
after the belly. Wherever they go, they set out taking only these
things. They're like a bird: wherever it flies, wings are its only
burden. In the same way, a mendicant is content with robes to look after
the body and almsfood to look after the belly. Wherever they go, they
set out taking only these things. When they have this entire spectrum of
noble ethics, they experience a blameless happiness inside themselves.

When they see a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained,
bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving restraint over it. When they hear a
sound with their ears ... When they smell an odor with their nose ...
When they taste a flavor with their tongue ... When they feel a touch
with their body ... When they know an idea with their mind, they don't
get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of mind were
left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and
displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice
restraint, protecting the faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.
When they have this noble sense restraint, they experience an unsullied
bliss inside themselves.

They act with situational awareness when going out and coming back; when
looking ahead and aside; when bending and extending the limbs; when
bearing the outer robe, bowl and robes; when eating, drinking, chewing,
and tasting; when urinating and defecating; when walking, standing,
sitting, sleeping, waking, speaking, and keeping silent.

When they have this entire spectrum of noble ethics, this noble sense
restraint, and this noble mindfulness and situational awareness, they
frequent a secluded lodging---a wilderness, the root of a tree, a hill,
a ravine, a mountain cave, a charnel ground, a forest, the open air, a
heap of straw. Gone to a wilderness, or to the root of a tree, or to an
empty hut, they sit down cross-legged, set their body straight, and
establish mindfulness in their presence.

Giving up covetousness for the world, they meditate with a heart rid of
covetousness, cleansing the mind of covetousness. Giving up ill will and
malevolence, they meditate with a mind rid of ill will, full of sympathy
for all living beings, cleansing the mind of ill will. Giving up
dullness and drowsiness, they meditate with a mind rid of dullness and
drowsiness, perceiving light, mindful and aware, cleansing the mind of
dullness and drowsiness. Giving up restlessness and remorse, they
meditate without restlessness, their mind peaceful inside, cleansing the
mind of restlessness and remorse. Giving up doubt, they meditate having
gone beyond doubt, not undecided about skillful qualities, cleansing the
mind of doubt.

They give up these five hindrances, corruptions of the heart that weaken
wisdom. Then, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unskillful qualities, they enter and remain in the first absorption,
which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the
mind and keeping it connected. What do you think, Upāli?
Isn't this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which
has the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and
mind at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. What do
you think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they
had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' What do you
think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they had
before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption,
without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. ..." ...

"Furthermore, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with the ending
of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite', a mendicant enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. What do you think, Upāli?
Isn't this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite', a mendicant enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. ..." ...

"Going totally beyond the dimension of infinite consciousness, aware
that 'there is nothing at all', they enter and remain in the dimension
of nothingness. ..." ...

"Going totally beyond the dimension of nothingness, aware that 'this is
peaceful, this is sublime', they enter and remain in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. What do you think,
Upāli? Isn't this state better than what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. But so far they
haven't achieved their own goal.

Furthermore, going totally beyond the dimension of neither perception
nor non-perception, they enter and remain in the cessation of perception
and feeling. And, having seen with wisdom, their defilements come to an
end. What do you think, Upāli? Isn't this state better than
what they had before?"

"Yes, sir."

"When my disciples see this quality inside themselves they frequent
remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest. And they have achieved
their own goal. Come on, Upāli, stay with the
Saṅgha. If you stay with the Saṅgha you'll be
comfortable."

<!--pg-->
### AN 10.100 Cannot  *Abhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, without giving up ten things you can't realize perfection.
What ten? Greed, hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt,
jealousy, stinginess, and conceit. Without giving up these ten things
you can't realize perfection.

After giving up ten things you can realize perfection. What ten? Greed,
hate, delusion, anger, acrimony, disdain, contempt, jealousy,
stinginess, and conceit. After giving up these ten things you can
realize perfection."


