# The Chapter on Recollection

### AN 11.11 With Mahānāma (1st)  *Paṭhamamahānāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good, Mahānāma! It's appropriate that gentlemen such
as you come to me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of
these should we practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The
energetic succeed, not the lazy. The mindful succeed, not the unmindful.
Those with immersion succeed, not those without immersion. The wise
succeed, not the witless.

When you're grounded on these five things, go on to develop six further
things.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. This is called a noble disciple who
lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled
among people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the
teaching and developed the recollection of the Buddha.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' When a noble disciple recollects the teaching
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called
a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced,
and lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the teaching.

Furthermore, you should recollect the Saṅgha: 'The
Saṅgha of the Buddha's disciples is practicing the way
that's good, sincere, systematic, and proper. It consists of the four
pairs, the eight individuals. This is the Saṅgha of the
Buddha's disciples that is worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods,
worthy of hospitality, worthy of a religious donation, worthy of
greeting with joined palms, and is the supreme field of merit for the
world.' When a noble disciple recollects the Saṅgha their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own ethical conduct, which is
intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred, liberating, praised by
sensible people, not mistaken, and leading to immersion. When a noble
disciple recollects their ethical conduct their mind is not full of
greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a noble disciple who lives
in balance among people who are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among
people who are troubled. They've entered the stream of the teaching and
developed the recollection of their ethical conduct.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate. Among people with hearts full of the stain
of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' When a noble disciple recollects their own generosity their
mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. ... This is called a
noble disciple who lives in balance among people who are unbalanced, and
lives untroubled among people who are troubled. They've entered the
stream of the teaching and developed the recollection of generosity.

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities: 'There are the gods of
the four great kings, the gods of the thirty-three, the gods of Yama,
the joyful gods, the gods who love to imagine, the gods who control what
is imagined by others, the gods of the Divinity's host, and gods even
higher than these. When those deities passed away from here, they were
reborn there because of their faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and
wisdom. I, too, have the same kind of faith, ethics, learning,
generosity, and wisdom.' When a noble disciple recollects the faith,
ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the
deities their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that
time their mind is unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple
whose mind is unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the
teaching, and finds joy connected with the teaching. When they're
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when
they're blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi.
This is called a noble disciple who lives in balance among people who
are unbalanced, and lives untroubled among people who are troubled.
They've entered the stream of the teaching and developed the
recollection of the deities."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.12 With Mahānāma (2nd)  *Dutiyamahānāmasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Now at that time
Mahānāma the Sakyan had recently recovered from an illness.
At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha ...

Mahānāma the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good, Mahānāma! It's appropriate that gentlemen such
as you come to me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of
these should we practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The
energetic succeed, not the lazy. The mindful succeed, not the unmindful.
Those with immersion succeed, not those without immersion. The wise
succeed, not the witless. When you're grounded on these five things, go
on to develop six further things.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' When a noble
disciple recollects the Realized One their mind is not full of greed,
hate, and delusion. At that time their mind is unswerving, based on the
Realized One. A noble disciple whose mind is unswerving finds
inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy connected
with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the mind becomes
immersed in samādhi. You should develop this recollection
of the Buddha while walking, standing, sitting, lying down, while
working, and while at home with your children.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching ... the
Saṅgha ... your own ethical conduct ... your own generosity
... the deities ... When a noble disciple recollects the faith, ethics,
learning, generosity, and wisdom of both themselves and the deities
their mind is not full of greed, hate, and delusion. At that time their
mind is unswerving, based on the deities. A noble disciple whose mind is
unswerving finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds
joy connected with the teaching. When they're joyful, rapture springs
up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When
the body is tranquil, they feel bliss. And when they're blissful, the
mind becomes immersed in samādhi. You should develop this
recollection of the deities while walking, standing, sitting, lying
down, while working, and while at home with your children."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.13 With Nandiya  *Nandiyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Now at that time the Buddha wanted to commence the rains residence at
Sāvatthī.

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this, and thought, "Why don't I also
commence the rains residence at Sāvatthī. There I can focus
on my work and from time to time get to see the Buddha."

So the Buddha commenced the rains residence in Sāvatthī,
and so did Nandiya. There he focused on his work and from time to time
got to see the Buddha.

At that time several mendicants were making a robe for the Buddha,
thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of the
rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering.

Nandiya the Sakyan heard about this. He went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that several mendicants are making a robe for the
Buddha, thinking that when his robe was finished and the three months of
the rains residence had passed the Buddha would set out wandering. Now,
we spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we practice?"

"Good, good Nandiya! It's appropriate that gentlemen such as you come to
me and ask: 'We spend our life in various ways. Which of these should we
practice?' The faithful succeed, not the faithless. The ethical succeed,
not the unethical. The energetic succeed, not the lazy. The mindful
succeed, not the unmindful. Those with immersion succeed, not those
without immersion. The wise succeed, not the witless. When you're
grounded on these six things, go on to establish mindfulness on five
further things internally.

Firstly, you should recollect the Realized One: 'That Blessed One is
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.' In this way you
should establish mindfulness internally based on the Realized One.

Furthermore, you should recollect the teaching: 'The teaching is well
explained by the Buddha---apparent in the present life, immediately
effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can
know it for themselves.' In this way you should establish mindfulness
internally based on the teaching.

Furthermore, you should recollect your good friends: 'I'm fortunate, so
very fortunate, to have good friends who advise and instruct me out of
kindness and sympathy.' In this way you should establish mindfulness
internally based on good friends.

Furthermore, you should recollect your own generosity: 'I'm so
fortunate, so very fortunate. Among people with hearts full of the stain
of stinginess I live at home rid of stinginess, freely generous,
open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and
to share.' In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based
on generosity.

Furthermore, you should recollect the deities: 'There are deities who,
surpassing the company of deities that consume solid food, are reborn in
a certain host of mind-made deities. They don't see in themselves
anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.' An
irreversibly freed mendicant doesn't see in themselves anything more to
do, or anything that needs improvement. In the same way, Nandiya, there
are deities who, surpassing the company of deities that consume solid
food, are reborn in a certain host of mind-made deities. They don't see
in themselves anything more to do, or anything that needs improvement.
In this way you should establish mindfulness internally based on the
deities.

A noble disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't cling to them. It's like when a pot full of water
is tipped over, so the water drains out and doesn't go back in. Suppose
there was an uncontrolled fire. It advances burning up dry woodlands and
doesn't go back over what it has burned. In the same way, a noble
disciple who has these eleven qualities gives up bad, unskillful
qualities and doesn't cling to them."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.14 With Subhūti  *Subhūtisutta*

And then Venerable Subhūti together with the mendicant
Saddha went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The
Buddha said to him, "Subhūti, what is the name of this
mendicant?"

"Sir, the name of this mendicant is Saddha. He is the son of the layman
Sudatta, and has gone forth out of faith from the lay life to
homelessness."

"Well, I hope this mendicant Saddha exhibits the various evidences of
faith."

"Now is the time, Blessed One! Now is the time, Holy One! Let the Buddha
to speak on the evidence of faith. Now I will find out whether or not
this mendicant Saddha exhibits the various evidences of faith."

"Well then, Subhūti, listen and apply your mind well, I
will speak."

"Yes, sir," Subhūti replied. The Buddha said this:

"Firstly, a mendicant is ethical, restrained in the monastic code,
conducting themselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places.
Seeing danger in the slightest fault, they keep the rules they've
undertaken. When a mendicant is ethical, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is very learned, remembering and keeping what
they've learned. These teachings are good in the beginning, good in the
middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased, describing a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. They are very learned
in such teachings, remembering them, rehearsing them, mentally
scrutinizing them, and comprehending them theoretically. When a
mendicant is learned, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant has good friends, companions, and associates.
When a mendicant has good friends, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is easy to admonish, having qualities that make
them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. When a mendicant is easy to admonish, this is evidence of
faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of
duties for their spiritual companions, understanding how to go about
things in order to complete and organize the work. When a mendicant is
deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties, this is evidence of
faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant loves the teachings and is a delight to
converse with, being full of joy in the teaching and training. When a
mendicant loves the teachings, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant lives with energy roused up for giving up
unskillful qualities and embracing skillful qualities. They are strong,
staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it comes to developing
skillful qualities. When a mendicant is energetic, this is evidence of
faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant gets the four absorptions---blissful
meditations in this life that belong to the higher mind---when they
want, without trouble or difficulty. When a mendicant gets the four
absorptions, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives. That is:
one, two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a
hundred, a thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. They remember: 'There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here.' And so they
recollect their many kinds of past lives, with features and details.
When a mendicant recollects many kinds of past lives, this is evidence
of faith.

Furthermore, with clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, a
mendicant sees sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior
and superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds.
'These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.' And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, they see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. They understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds. When a mendicant has
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, this is evidence of faith.

Furthermore, a mendicant has realized the undefiled freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom in this very life, and lives having realized it with
their own insight due to the ending of defilements. When a mendicant has
ended the defilements, this is evidence of faith."

When he said this, Venerable Subhūti said to the Buddha:

"Sir, the various evidences of faith for a faithful person that the
Buddha speaks of are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them.

This mendicant is ethical ...

This mendicant is learned ...

This mendicant has good friends ...

This mendicant is easy to admonish ...

This mendicant is deft and tireless in a diverse spectrum of duties ...

This mendicant loves the teachings ...

This mendicant is energetic ...

This mendicant gets the four absorptions ...

This mendicant recollects their many kinds of past lives ...

This mendicant has clairvoyance that is purified and surpasses the human
...

This mendicant has ended the defilements ...

The various evidences of faith for a faithful person that the Buddha
speaks of are found in this mendicant; he does exhibit them."

"Good, good, Subhūti! So, Subhūti, you should
live together with this mendicant Saddha. And when you want to see the
Realized One, you should come together with him."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.15 The Benefits of Love  *Mettāsutta*

"Mendicants, you can expect eleven benefits when the heart's release by
love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a
basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented.

What eleven? You sleep at ease. You wake happily. You don't have bad
dreams. Humans love you. Non-humans love you. Deities protect you. You
can't be harmed by fire, poison, or blade. Your mind quickly enters
immersion. Your face is clear and bright. You don't feel lost when you
die. If you don't penetrate any higher, you'll be reborn in a realm of
divinity. You can expect eleven benefits when the heart's release by
love has been cultivated, developed, and practiced, made a vehicle and a
basis, kept up, consolidated, and properly implemented."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.16 The Wealthy Citizen  *Aṭṭhakanāgarasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Vesālī in the
little village of Beluva.

Now at that time the householder Dasama, a wealthy citizen, had arrived
at Pāṭaliputta on some business. He went to the Chicken
Monastery, approached a certain mendicant, and said to him, "Sir, where
is Venerable Ānanda now staying? For I want to see him."

"Householder, Venerable Ānanda is staying near Vesālī in
the little village of Beluva."

Then the householder Dasama, having concluded his business there, went
to the little village of Beluva in Vesālī to see Ānanda. He
bowed, sat down to one side, and said to Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, is there one thing that has been rightly explained by
the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully
awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute
mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive
at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke?"

"There is, householder."

"And what is that one thing?"

"Householder, it's when a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the
first absorption, which has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion,
while placing the mind and keeping it connected. Then they reflect:
'Even this first absorption is produced by choices and intentions.' They
understand: 'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is
impermanent and liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One---who
knows and sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened
Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and resolute mendicant's
mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the
supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption ... third
absorption ... fourth absorption. Then they reflect: 'Even this fourth
absorption is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But
whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable
to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and
resolute mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and
they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Then they reflect: 'Even this heart's
release by love is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand:
'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and
liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of
defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the
ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because
of their passion and love for that meditation. They are extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. This too is one
thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant meditates spreading a heart full of compassion
... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. Then they reflect: 'Even this heart's release by
equanimity is produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But
whatever is produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable
to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond perceptions of form, with
the ending of perceptions of impingement, not focusing on perceptions of
diversity, aware that 'space is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite space. Then they reflect: 'Even this attainment of
the dimension of infinite space is produced by choices and intentions.'
They understand: 'But whatever is produced by choices and intentions is
impermanent and liable to cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the
ending of defilements. If they don't attain the ending of defilements,
with the ending of the five lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously,
because of their passion and love for that meditation. They are
extinguished there, and are not liable to return from that world. This
too is one thing that has been rightly explained by the Blessed One ...

Furthermore, a mendicant, going totally beyond the dimension of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite', enters and remains in the
dimension of infinite consciousness. ... Going totally beyond the
dimension of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing at
all', they enter and remain in the dimension of nothingness. ... Then
they reflect: 'Even this attainment of the dimension of nothingness is
produced by choices and intentions.' They understand: 'But whatever is
produced by choices and intentions is impermanent and liable to
cessation.' Abiding in that they attain the ending of defilements. If
they don't attain the ending of defilements, with the ending of the five
lower fetters they're reborn spontaneously, because of their passion and
love for that meditation. They are extinguished there, and are not
liable to return from that world. This too is one thing that has been
rightly explained by the Blessed One---who knows and sees, the perfected
one, the fully awakened Buddha---practicing which a diligent, keen, and
resolute mendicant's mind is freed, their defilements are ended, and
they reach the supreme sanctuary from the yoke."

When he said this, the householder Dasama said to Venerable Ānanda:

"Honorable Ānanda, suppose a person was looking for an entrance to a
hidden treasure. And all at once they'd come across eleven entrances! In
the same way, I was searching for the door to freedom from death. And
all at once I found eleven doors to freedom from death for cultivation.
Suppose a person had a house with eleven doors. If the house caught fire
they'd be able to flee to safety through any one of those doors. In the
same way, I'm able to flee to safety through any one of these eleven
doors to freedom from death. Sir, those of other religions will seek a
fee for the tutor. Why shouldn't I make an offering to Venerable
Ānanda?"

Then the householder Dasama, having assembled the Saṅgha
from Vesālī and Pāṭaliputta, served and
satisfied them with his own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.
He clothed each and every mendicant in a pair of garments, with a set of
three robes for Ānanda. And he had a dwelling worth five hundred built
for Ānanda.

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.17 The Cowherd  *Gopālasutta*

"Mendicants, a cowherd with eleven factors can't maintain and expand a
herd of cattle. What eleven? It's when a cowherd doesn't know form, is
unskilled in characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't
dress wounds, doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know
satisfaction, doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks
dry, and doesn't show extra respect to the bulls who are fathers and
leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can't maintain
and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant doesn't know form, is unskilled in
characteristics, doesn't pick out flies' eggs, doesn't dress wounds,
doesn't spread smoke, doesn't know the ford, doesn't know satisfaction,
doesn't know the trail, is not skilled in pastures, milks dry, and
doesn't show extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long
gone forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant not know form? It's when a mendicant doesn't
truly understand that all form is the four principal states, or form
derived from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant doesn't
know form.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in characteristics? It's when a
mendicant doesn't understand that a fool is characterized by their
deeds, and an astute person is characterized by their deeds. That's how
a mendicant isn't skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant not pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
tolerates a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen. They
don't give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. They
tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen. They don't give
them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. That's
how a mendicant doesn't pick out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant not dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they get caught up in the features and details. Since
the faculty of sight is left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure become overwhelming. They don't practice
restraint, they don't protect the faculty of sight, and they don't
achieve its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When
they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with
their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they
know an idea with their mind, they get caught up in the features and
details. Since the faculty of the mind is left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure become
overwhelming. They don't practice restraint, they don't protect the
faculty of the mind, and they don't achieve its restraint. That's how a
mendicant doesn't dress wounds.

And how does a mendicant not spread smoke? It's when a mendicant doesn't
teach others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it.
That's how a mendicant doesn't spread smoke.

And how does a mendicant not know the ford? It's when a mendicant
doesn't from time to time go up to those mendicants who are very
learned---inheritors of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings,
the monastic law, and the outlines---and ask them questions: 'Why, sir,
does it say this? What does that mean?' Those venerables don't clarify
what is unclear, reveal what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the
many doubtful matters. That's how a mendicant doesn't know the ford.

And how does a mendicant not know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant,
when the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds no inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds
no joy connected with the teaching. That's how a mendicant doesn't know
satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant not know the trail? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the noble eightfold path. That's how a
mendicant doesn't know the trail.

And how is a mendicant not skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant
doesn't truly understand the four kinds of mindfulness meditation.
That's how a mendicant is not skilled in pastures.

And how does a mendicant milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited by a
householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. But they don't know moderation in accepting.
That's how a mendicant milks dry.

And how does a mendicant not show extra respect to senior mendicants of
long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the
Saṅgha? It's when a mendicant doesn't consistently treat
senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders
of the Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and
mind, both in public and in private. That's how a mendicant doesn't show
extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth,
fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can't achieve growth,
improvement, or maturity in this teaching and training.

A cowherd with eleven factors can maintain and expand a herd of cattle.
What eleven? It's when a cowherd knows form, is skilled in
characteristics, picks out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke,
knows the ford, knows satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in
pastures, doesn't milk dry, and shows extra respect to the bulls who are
fathers and leaders of the herd. A cowherd with these eleven factors can
maintain and expand a herd of cattle.

In the same way, a mendicant with eleven qualities can achieve growth,
improvement, and maturity in this teaching and training. What eleven?
It's when a mendicant knows form, is skilled in characteristics, picks
out flies' eggs, dresses wounds, spreads smoke, knows the ford, knows
satisfaction, knows the trail, is skilled in pastures, doesn't milk dry,
and shows extra respect to senior mendicants of long standing, long gone
forth, fathers and leaders of the Saṅgha.

And how does a mendicant know form? It's when a mendicant truly
understands that all form is the four principal states, or form derived
from the four principal states. That's how a mendicant knows form.

And how is a mendicant skilled in characteristics? It's when a mendicant
understands that a fool is characterized by their deeds, and an astute
person is characterized by their deeds. That's how a mendicant is
skilled in characteristics.

And how does a mendicant pick out flies' eggs? It's when a mendicant
doesn't tolerate a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought that has arisen,
but gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, and exterminates it.
They don't tolerate any bad, unskillful qualities that have arisen, but
give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.
That's how a mendicant picks out flies' eggs.

And how does a mendicant dress wounds? When a mendicant sees a sight
with their eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and details.
If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities
of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this
reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight, and
achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ... When
they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor with
their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When they
know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how a mendicant
dresses wounds.

And how does a mendicant spread smoke? It's when a mendicant teaches
others the Dhamma in detail as they learned and memorized it. That's how
a mendicant spreads smoke.

And how does a mendicant know the ford? It's when from time to time a
mendicant goes up to those mendicants who are very learned---inheritors
of the heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and
the outlines---and asks them questions: 'Why, sir, does it say this?
What does that mean?' Those venerables clarify what is unclear, reveal
what is obscure, and dispel doubt regarding the many doubtful matters.
That's how a mendicant knows the ford.

And how does a mendicant know satisfaction? It's when a mendicant, when
the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One are being
taught, finds inspiration in the meaning and the teaching, and finds joy
connected with the teaching. That's how a mendicant knows satisfaction.

And how does a mendicant know the trail? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the noble eightfold path. That's how a mendicant knows the
trail.

And how is a mendicant skilled in pastures? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. That's how a
mendicant is skilled in pastures.

And how does a mendicant not milk dry? It's when a mendicant is invited
by a householder to accept robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick. And that mendicant knows moderation in accepting.
That's how a mendicant doesn't milk dry.

And how does a mendicant show extra respect to senior mendicants of long
standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the
Saṅgha? It's when a mendicant consistently treats senior
mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders of the
Saṅgha with kindness by way of body, speech, and mind, both
in public and in private. That's how a mendicant shows extra respect to
senior mendicants of long standing, long gone forth, fathers and leaders
of the Saṅgha.

A mendicant with these eleven qualities can achieve growth, improvement,
or maturity in this teaching and training."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.18 Immersion (1st)  *Paṭhamasamādhisutta*

And then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Could it be, sir, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion like
this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire in
fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, mendicants."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.19 Immersion (2nd)  *Dutiyasamādhisutta*

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Could it be, mendicants, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in
water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the
dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't
perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other
world. And they wouldn't perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known,
attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still
perceive."

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.20 Immersion (3rd)  *Tatiyasamādhisutta*

And then several mendicants went up to Venerable Sāriputta,
and exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite
conversation were over, they sat down to one side and said to him:

"Could it be, reverend, that a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

"It could be, reverends."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

<!--pg-->
### AN 11.21 Immersion (4th)  *Catutthasamādhisutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants:

"Could it be, reverends, that a mendicant might gain a state of
immersion like this? They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in
water, fire in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the
dimension of infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the
dimension of infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite
consciousness, the dimension of nothingness in the dimension of
nothingness, or the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception
in the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't
perceive this world in this world, or the other world in the other
world. And they wouldn't perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known,
attained, sought, or explored by the mind. And yet they would still
perceive."

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May
Venerable Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of
this. The mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, friend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"A mendicant could gain such a state of immersion."

"But how could this be?"

"It's when a mendicant perceives: 'This is peaceful; this is
sublime---that is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment.' That's how a mendicant might gain a state of immersion
like this. They wouldn't perceive earth in earth, water in water, fire
in fire, or air in air. And they wouldn't perceive the dimension of
infinite space in the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of
infinite consciousness in the dimension of infinite consciousness, the
dimension of nothingness in the dimension of nothingness, or the
dimension of neither perception nor non-perception in the dimension of
neither perception nor non-perception. They wouldn't perceive this world
in this world, or the other world in the other world. And they wouldn't
perceive what is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, or
explored by the mind. And yet they would still perceive."

