# The Chapter on Perils of Offenses


### N 4.243 Schism in the Saṅgha *Saṁghabhedakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed,
and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him, "Well, Ānanda, has
that disciplinary issue been settled yet?"

"How could it be, sir? Venerable Anuruddha's protégé Bāhiya
remains entirely committed to creating a schism in the
Saṅgha. But Anuruddha doesn't think to say a single word
about it."

"But Ānanda, since when has Anuruddha been involved in disciplinary
issues in the midst of the Saṅgha? Shouldn't you, together
with Sāriputta and Moggallāna, settle all
disciplinary issues that come up?

A bad monk sees four reasons to relish schism in the
Saṅgha. What four? Take an unethical monk, of bad
qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic
or spiritual practitioner---though claiming to be one---rotten inside,
festering, and depraved. He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I'm a
bad monk ... If they're in harmony, they'll expel me, but if they're
divided they won't.' A bad monk sees this as the first reason to relish
schism in the Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk has wrong view, he's attached to an extremist
view. He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I have wrong view ... If
they're in harmony they'll expel me, but if they're divided they won't.'
A bad monk sees this as the second reason to relish schism in the
Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk has wrong livelihood and earns a living by wrong
livelihood. He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I have wrong
livelihood ... If they're in harmony they'll expel me, but if they're
divided they won't.' A bad monk sees this as the third reason to relish
schism in the Saṅgha.

Furthermore, a bad monk desires material things, honor, and admiration.
He thinks: 'Suppose the monks know that I desire material things, honor,
and admiration. If they're in harmony they won't honor, respect, revere,
or venerate me, but if they're divided they will.' A bad monk sees this
as the fourth reason to relish schism in the Saṅgha.

A bad monk sees these four reasons to relish schism in the
Saṅgha."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.244 Perils of Offenses *Āpattibhayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four perils of offenses. What four?

Suppose they were to arrest a bandit, a criminal and present him to the
king, saying: 'Your Majesty, this is a bandit, a criminal. May Your
Majesty punish them!' The king would say: 'Go, my men, and tie this
man's arms tightly behind his back with a strong rope. Shave his head
and march him from street to street and square to square to the beating
of a harsh drum. Then take him out the south gate and there, to the
south of the city, chop off his head.' The king's men would do as they
were told. Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have done a
truly bad and reprehensible deed, a capital offense. There's no way I'd
ever do such a bad and reprehensible deed, a capital offense.' In the
same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception
of peril regarding expulsion offenses. It can be expected that if they
haven't committed an expulsion offense they won't, and if they committed
one they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth, mess up his hair, and put a
club on his shoulder. Then he approaches a large crowd and says: 'Sirs,
I've done a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of clubbing. I submit
to your pleasure.' Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have
done a truly bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of clubbing. ...
There's no way I'd ever do such a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving
of clubbing.' In the same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such
an acute perception of peril regarding suspension offenses. It can be
expected that if they haven't committed a suspension offense they won't,
and if they committed one they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth, mess up his hair, and put a
sack of ashes on his shoulder. Then he approaches a large crowd and
says: 'Sirs, I've done a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of a sack
of ashes. I submit to your pleasure.' Then a bystander might think:
'This man must have done a truly bad and reprehensible deed, deserving
of a sack of ashes. ... There's no way I'd ever do such a bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of a sack of ashes.' In the same way, take
any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception of peril
regarding confessable offenses. It can be expected that if they haven't
committed a confessable offense they won't, and if they committed one
they will deal with it properly.

Suppose a man was to put on a black cloth and mess up his hair. Then he
approaches a large crowd and says: 'Sirs, I've done a bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism. I submit to your pleasure.'
Then a bystander might think: 'This man must have done a truly bad and
reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism. ... There's no way I'd ever
do such a bad and reprehensible deed, deserving of criticism.' In the
same way, take any monk or nun who has set up such an acute perception
of peril regarding acknowledgable offenses. It can be expected that if
they haven't committed an acknowledgeable offense they won't, and if
they committed one they will deal with it properly.

These are the four perils of offenses."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.245 The Benefits of Training *Sikkhānisaṁsasutta*

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is lived with training as its benefit,
with wisdom as its overseer, with freedom as its core, and with
mindfulness as its ruler.

And how is training its benefit? Firstly, I laid down for my disciples
the training that deals with supplementary regulations in order to
inspire confidence in those without it and to increase confidence in
those who have it. They undertake whatever supplementary regulations I
have laid down, keeping them intact, impeccable, spotless, and unmarred.

Furthermore, I laid down for my disciples the training that deals with
the fundamentals of the spiritual life in order to rightly end suffering
in every way. They undertake whatever training that deals with the
fundamentals of the spiritual life I have laid down, keeping it intact,
impeccable, spotless, and unmarred. That's how training is its benefit.

And how is wisdom its overseer? I taught the Dhamma to my disciples in
order to rightly end suffering in every way. They examine with wisdom
any teachings I taught them. That's how wisdom is its overseer.

And how is freedom its core? I taught the Dhamma to my disciples in
order to rightly end suffering in every way. They experience through
freedom any teachings I taught them. That's how freedom is its core.

And how is mindfulness its ruler? Mindfulness is well established in
oneself: 'In this way I'll fulfill the training dealing with
supplementary regulations, or support with wisdom in every situation the
training dealing with supplementary regulations I've already fulfilled.'
Mindfulness is well established in oneself: 'In this way I'll fulfill
the training dealing with the fundamentals of the spiritual life, or
support with wisdom in every situation the training dealing with the
fundamentals of the spiritual life I've already fulfilled.' Mindfulness
is well established in oneself: 'In this way I'll examine with wisdom
the teaching that I haven't yet examined, or support with wisdom in
every situation the teaching I've already examined.' Mindfulness is well
established in oneself: 'In this way I'll experience through freedom the
teaching that I haven't yet experienced, or support with wisdom in every
situation the teaching I've already experienced.' That's how mindfulness
is its ruler.

'This spiritual life is lived with training as its benefit, with wisdom
as its overseer, with freedom as its core, and with mindfulness as its
ruler.' That's what I said, and this is why I said it."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.246 Lying Postures *Seyyāsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of lying down. What four? The
ways a corpse, a pleasure seeker, a lion, and a Realized One lie down.

And how does a corpse lie down? Corpses usually lie flat on their backs.
This is called the way a corpse lies down.

And how does a pleasure seeker lie down? Pleasure seekers usually lie
down on their left side. This is called the way a pleasure seeker lies
down.

And how does a lion lie down? The lion, king of beasts, lies down on the
right side, placing one foot on top of the other, with his tail tucked
between his thighs. When he wakes, he lifts his front quarters and
checks his hind quarters. If he sees that any part of his body is
disordered or displaced, he is displeased. But if he sees that no part
of his body is disordered or displaced, he is pleased. This is called
the way a lion lies down.

And how does a Realized One lie down? It's when a Realized One, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
enters and remains in the first absorption ... second absorption ...
third absorption ... fourth absorption. This is called the way a
Realized One lies down.

These are the four ways of lying down."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.247 Worthy of a Monument *Thūpārahasutta*

"Mendicants, these four are worthy of a monument. What four? A Realized
One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha; an Independent Buddha; a
disciple of a Realized One; and a wheel-turning monarch. These four are
worthy of a monument."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.248 The Growth of Wisdom *Paññāvuddhisutta*

"Mendicants, these four things lead to the growth of wisdom. What four?
Associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching, rational
application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching. These
four things lead to the growth of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.249 Very Helpful *Bahukārasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are very helpful to a human being. What
four? Associating with true persons, listening to the true teaching,
rational application of mind, and practicing in line with the teaching.
These four things are very helpful to a human being."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.250 Expressions (1st) *Paṭhamavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble expressions. What four? Saying
you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, but you haven't. These
are the four ignoble expressions."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.251 Expressions (2nd) *Dutiyavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble expressions. What four? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you haven't.
These are the four noble expressions."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.252 Expressions (3rd) *Tatiyavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ignoble expressions. What four? Saying
you haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you have.
These are the four ignoble expressions."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.253 Expressions (4th) *Catutthavohārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four noble expressions. What four? Saying
you've seen, heard, thought, or known something, and you have. These are
the four noble expressions."

