# The Chapter on Faculties


### N 4.151 Faculties *Indriyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four faculties. What four? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion. These are the four
faculties."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.152 The Power of Faith *Saddhābalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion. These are the four powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.153 The Power of Wisdom *Paññābalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
wisdom, energy, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the four
powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.154 The Power of Mindfulness *Satibalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
mindfulness, immersion, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the
four powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.155 The Power of Reflection *Paṭisaṅkhānabalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four powers. What four? The powers of
reflection, development, blamelessness, and inclusiveness. These are the
four powers."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.156 Eons *Kappasutta*

"Mendicants, an eon contains four uncountable periods. What four?

When an eon contracts, it's not easy to calculate how many years, how
many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it takes.

When an eon remains fully contracted, it's not easy to calculate how
many years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of
years it takes.

When an eon expands, it's not easy to calculate how many years, how many
hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years it takes.

When an eon remains fully expanded, it's not easy to calculate how many
years, how many hundreds or thousands or hundreds of thousands of years
it takes.

These are the four uncountable periods of an eon."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.157 Illness *Rogasutta*

"Mendicants, there are two kinds of illness. What two? Mental and
physical. Some sentient beings are seen who can claim to be free of
physical illness for a year, or two, or three years ... even up to a
hundred years or more. But it's very hard to find any sentient beings in
the world who can claim to be free of mental illness even for an hour,
apart from those who have ended the defilements.

There are four kinds of illness for those gone forth. What four?

To start with, a mendicant has many wishes, is frustrated, and is not
content with any kind of robes, almsfood, lodgings, and medicines and
supplies for the sick.

Because of this, they focus their corrupt wishes on status, and on
getting material things, honor, and popularity.

They try hard, strive, and make an effort to get these things.

They have an ulterior motive when they visit families. They have an
ulterior motive when they sit down, when they speak on Dhamma, and even
when they hold it in when they need to go to the toilet.

These are the four kinds of illness for those gone forth.

So you should train like this: 'We will not have many wishes or be
frustrated. We will be content with any kind of robes, almsfood,
lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick. We won't focus our
corrupt wishes on status, and on getting material things, honor, and
popularity. We won't try hard, strive, and make an effort to get these
things. We will endure cold, heat, hunger, and thirst. We will endure
the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles. We will endure
rude and unwelcome criticism. We will put up with physical pain---sharp,
severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, and life-threatening.' That's
how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.158 Decline *Parihānisutta*

There Sāriputta addressed the mendicants: "Reverends,
mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, any monk or nun who sees four things inside themselves
should conclude: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what
the Buddha calls decline.' What four? They have much greed, much hate,
and much delusion; and their wisdom eye doesn't go into the many deep
matters. Any monk or nun who sees these four things inside themselves
should conclude: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what
the Buddha calls decline.'

Any monk or nun who sees four things inside themselves should conclude:
'My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha
calls non-decline.' What four? Their greed, hate, and delusion grow
less; and their wisdom eye goes into the many deep matters. Any monk or
nun who sees these four things inside themselves should conclude: 'My
skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls
non-decline.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 4.159 Nun *Bhikkhunīsutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

And then a certain nun addressed a man, "Please, mister, go to Master
Ānanda, and in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir,
the nun named so-and-so is sick, suffering, and gravely ill. She bows
with her head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please go to the nuns'
quarters to visit that nun out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, ma'am," that man replied. He did as the nun asked. Ānanda
consented with silence.

Then Ānanda robed up and went to the nuns' quarters to visit that nun,
taking his bowl and robe. That nun saw Ānanda coming off in the
distance. She wrapped herself up from head to foot and laid down on her
cot. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to her, and sat down on the seat
spread out. Then Ānanda said to the nun:

"Sister, this body is produced by food. Relying on food, you should give
up food. This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, you
should give up craving. This body is produced by conceit. Relying on
conceit, you should give up conceit. This body is produced by sex. The
Buddha spoke of breaking off everything to do with sex.

'This body is produced by food. Relying on food, you should give up
food.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant who
reflects rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' After
some time, relying on food, they give up food. That's why I said what I
said.

'This body is produced by craving. Relying on craving, you should give
up craving.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who hears this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.' They think: 'Oh, when will I too realize
the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life.
...' After some time, relying on craving, they give up craving. That's
why I said what I said.

'This body is produced by conceit. Relying on conceit, you should give
up conceit.' This is what I said, but why did I say it? Take a mendicant
who hears this: 'They say that the mendicant named so-and-so has
realized the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. And they live having realized it with their own insight due
to the ending of defilements.' They think: 'Well, that venerable can
realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this
very life. ... Why can't I?' After some time, relying on conceit, they
give up conceit. That's why I said what I said.

'This body is produced by sex. The Buddha spoke of breaking off
everything to do with sex.'"

Then that nun rose from her cot, placed her robe over one shoulder,
bowed with her head at Ānanda's feet, and said, "I have made a mistake,
sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of me to act in that way.
Please, sir, accept my mistake for what it is, so I can restrain myself
in future."

"Indeed, sister, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and
unskillful of you to act in that way. But since you have recognized your
mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to recognize a mistake
for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the
future."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.160 The Training of a Holy One *Sugatavinayasutta*

"Mendicants, a Holy One or a Holy One's training remain in the world for
the welfare and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world,
for the benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

And who is a Holy One? It's when a Realized One arises in the world,
perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and
conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to
train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed. This is a Holy
One.

And what is the training of a Holy One? He proclaims a teaching that is
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. This is the training of a Holy One. This is how
a Holy One or a Holy One's training remain in the world for the welfare
and happiness of the people, out of sympathy for the world, for the
benefit, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans.

These four things lead to the decline and disappearance of the true
teaching. What four?

Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that they learned
incorrectly, with misplaced words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are misplaced, the meaning is misinterpreted. This is the first
thing that leads to the decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are hard to admonish, having qualities that
make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take
instruction respectfully. This is the second thing that leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---don't carefully make others recite the discourses. When they
pass away, the discourses are cut off at the root, with no-one to
preserve them. This is the third thing that leads to the decline and
disappearance of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are indulgent and slack, leaders in
backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not rousing energy for attaining the
unattained, achieving the unachieved, and realizing the unrealized.
Those who come after them follow their example. They too become
indulgent and slack, leaders in backsliding, neglecting seclusion, not
rousing energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved,
and realizing the unrealized. This is the fourth thing that leads to the
decline and disappearance of the true teaching.

These are four things that lead to the decline and disappearance of the
true teaching.

These four things lead to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of
the true teaching. What four?

Firstly, the mendicants memorize discourses that have been learned
correctly, with well placed words and phrases. When the words and
phrases are well placed, the meaning is interpreted correctly. This is
the first thing that leads to the continuation, persistence, and
enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants are easy to admonish, having qualities that
make them easy to admonish. They're patient, and take instruction
respectfully. This is the second thing that leads to the continuation,
persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the mendicants who are very learned---inheritors of the
heritage, who have memorized the teachings, the monastic law, and the
outlines---carefully make others recite the discourses. When they pass
away, the discourses aren't cut off at the root, and they have someone
to preserve them. This is the third thing that leads to the
continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true teaching.

Furthermore, the senior mendicants are not indulgent or slack, nor are
they backsliders; instead, they take the lead in seclusion, rousing
energy for attaining the unattained, achieving the unachieved, and
realizing the unrealized. Those who come after them follow their
example. They too aren't indulgent or slack ... This is the fourth thing
that leads to the continuation, persistence, and enduring of the true
teaching.

These are four things that lead to the continuation, persistence, and
enduring of the true teaching."

