# The Chapter on Deeds


### N 4.232 Deeds In Brief *Saṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results.

2.  There are bright deeds with bright results.

3.  There are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results.

4.  There are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
    results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.233 Deeds in Detail *Vitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;

2.  bright deeds with bright results;

3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and

4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they're reborn in a hurtful world, where hurtful contacts
strike them. Touched by hurtful contacts, they experience hurtful
feelings that are exclusively painful---like the beings in hell. These
are called dark deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. Having made these
choices, they're reborn in a pleasing world, where pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing
feelings of perfect happiness---like the gods of universal beauty. These
are called bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. Having made these choices, they are reborn in a world
that is both hurtful and pleasing, where hurtful and pleasing contacts
strike them. Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts, they
experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of
pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright
results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.234 About Soṇakāyana *Soṇakāyanasutta*

Then Sikhāmoggallāna the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, Sikhāmoggallāna sat down to one side, and said
to the Buddha:

"Mister Gotama, a few days ago the student Soṇakāyana came
to me and said: 'The ascetic Gotama advocates not doing any deeds. So he
teaches the annihilation of the world!' The world exists through deeds,
and it remains because deeds are undertaken."

"Brahmin, I can't recall even seeing the student
Soṇakāyana, so how could we possibly have had such a
discussion? I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;

2.  bright deeds with bright results;

3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and

4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are the dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. ... Touched by hurtful
contacts, they experience hurtful feelings that are exclusively
painful---like the beings in hell. These are called dark deeds with dark
results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. ... Touched by
pleasing contacts, they experience pleasing feelings of perfect
happiness---like the gods of universal beauty. These are called bright
deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. ... Touched by both hurtful and pleasing contacts,
they experience both hurtful and pleasing feelings that are a mixture of
pleasure and pain---like humans, some gods, and some beings in the
underworld. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and bright
results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.235 Training Rules (1st) *Paṭhamasikkhāpadasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;

2.  bright deeds with bright results;

3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and

4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are the dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone kills
living creatures, steals, commits sexual misconduct, lies, and consumes
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are called dark deeds with
dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, lie, or consume
beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants. These are called bright deeds with
bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.236 Training Rules (2nd) *Dutiyasikkhāpadasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;

2.  bright deeds with bright results;

3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and

4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone murders
their mother or father or a perfected one. They maliciously shed the
blood of a Realized One. Or they cause a schism in the
Saṅgha. These are called dark deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone doesn't
kill living creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't
use speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're
content, kind-hearted, with right view. These are called bright deeds
with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? It's the intention to give
up dark deeds with dark results, bright deeds with bright results, and
both dark and bright deeds with both dark and bright results. These are
called neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.237 The Noble Path *Ariyamaggasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight. What four?

1.  There are dark deeds with dark results;

2.  bright deeds with bright results;

3.  dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results; and

4.  neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results,
    which lead to the ending of deeds.

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark
deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called
bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? Right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. These are called neither dark nor
bright deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the
ending of deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.238 Awakening Factors *Bojjhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, I declare these four kinds of deeds, having realized them
with my own insight....

And what are dark deeds with dark results? It's when someone makes
hurtful choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called dark
deeds with dark results.

And what are bright deeds with bright results? It's when someone makes
pleasing choices by way of body, speech, and mind. These are called
bright deeds with bright results.

And what are dark and bright deeds with dark and bright results? It's
when someone makes both hurtful and pleasing choices by way of body,
speech, and mind. These are called dark and bright deeds with dark and
bright results.

And what are neither dark nor bright deeds with neither dark nor bright
results, which lead to the ending of deeds? The awakening factors of
mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility,
immersion, and equanimity. These are called neither dark nor bright
deeds with neither dark nor bright results, which lead to the ending of
deeds.

These are the four kinds of deeds that I declare, having realized them
with my own insight."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.239 Blameworthy *Sāvajjasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Blameworthy deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and
blameworthy view. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to
hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Blameless
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and blameless view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.240 Pleasing *Abyābajjhasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Hurtful deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and hurtful view.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Pleasing
deeds by way of body, speech, and mind, and pleasing view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.241 Ascetics *Samaṇasutta*

"'Only here is there a first ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a
third ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects are empty of
ascetics.' This, mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion's
roar.

And who is the first ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
three fetters---is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening. This is the first ascetic.

And who is the second ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
three fetters, and the weakening of greed, hate, and delusion---is a
once-returner. They come back to this world once only, then make an end
of suffering. This is the second ascetic.

And who is the third ascetic? It's a mendicant who---with the ending of
the five lower fetters---is reborn spontaneously. They're extinguished
there, and are not liable to return from that world. This is the third
ascetic.

And who is the fourth ascetic? It's a mendicant who realizes the
undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom in this very life. And
they live having realized it with their own insight due to the ending of
defilements. This is the fourth ascetic.

'Only here is there a first ascetic, here a second ascetic, here a third
ascetic, and here a fourth ascetic. Other sects are empty of ascetics.'
This, mendicants, is how you should rightly roar your lion's roar."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.242 Benefits of Relying on a True Person *Sappurisānisaṁsasutta*

"Mendicants, you can expect four benefits from relying on a true person.
What four? Growth in noble ethics, immersion, wisdom, and freedom. You
can expect these four benefits from relying on a true person."

