# The Chapter on Guaranteed


### N 4.71 Effort *Padhānasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What four? It's when a mendicant is ethical, learned, energetic, and
wise. When a mendicant has these four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.72 Right View *Sammādiṭṭhisutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the defilements.
What four? Thoughts of renunciation, good will, and harmlessness; and
right view. When a mendicant has these four things their practice is
unfailing, and they have laid the groundwork for ending the
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.73 A True Person *Sappurisasutta*

"Mendicants, an untrue person can be known by four qualities. What four?

To start with, an untrue person speaks ill of another even when not
asked, let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's
how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person doesn't speak well of another even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of another without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person doesn't speak ill of themselves even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is an untrue person.

Furthermore, an untrue person speaks well of themselves even when not
asked, let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out.
That's how to know that this is an untrue person. An untrue person can
be known by these four qualities.

A true person can be known by four qualities. What four?

To start with, a true person doesn't speak ill of another even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak ill of another without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person speaks well of another even when not asked,
let alone when asked. But when summoned for questioning they speak well
of another in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's how to know
that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person speaks ill of themselves even when not asked,
let alone when asked. But when led on by questions they speak ill of
themselves in full detail, not leaving anything out. That's how to know
that this is a true person.

Furthermore, a true person doesn't speak well of themselves even when
asked, let alone when not asked. But when summoned for questioning they
speak well of themselves without giving the full details, leaving many
things out. That's how to know that this is a true person. A true person
can be known by these four qualities.

It's like a bride on the day or night she's first brought to her
husband's home. Right away she sets up a keen sense of conscience and
prudence for her mother and father in law, her husband, and even the
bondservants, workers, and staff. But after some time, because of living
together and familiarity, she'll even say to her mother and father in
law, or to her husband: 'Go away! What would you know?' In the same way,
on the day or night a mendicant first goes forth from the lay life to
homelessness, right away they set up a keen sense of conscience and
prudence for the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, and even the
monastery workers and novices. But after some time, because of living
together and familiarity, they'll even say to their tutor or mentor: 'Go
away! What would you know?'

So you should train like this: 'We will live with hearts like that of a
newly wedded bride.' That's how you should train."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.74 Best (1st) *Paṭhamaaggasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are the best. What four? The best ethics,
immersion, wisdom, and freedom. These are the four things that are the
best."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.75 Best (2nd) *Dutiyaaggasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are the best. What four? The best form,
feeling, perception, and existence. These are the four things that are
the best."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.76 At Kusinārā *Kusinārasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying between a pair of sal trees in the
sal forest of the Mallas at Upavattana near Kusinārā at the
time of his full extinguishment. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Perhaps even a single mendicant has doubt or uncertainty regarding the
Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the path, or the
practice. So ask, mendicants! Don't regret it later, thinking: 'We were
in the Teacher's presence and we weren't able to ask the Buddha a
question.'" When this was said, the mendicants kept silent.

For a second time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: ... For a second
time, the mendicants kept silent.

For a third time the Buddha addressed the mendicants: ... For a third
time, the mendicants kept silent.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants:

"Mendicants, perhaps you don't ask out of respect for the Teacher. So
let a friend tell a friend." When this was said, the mendicants kept
silent. Then Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! I am quite confident that there's
not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or
uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
the path, or the practice."

"Ānanda, you speak from faith. But the Realized One knows that there's
not even a single mendicant in this Saṅgha who has doubt or
uncertainty regarding the Buddha, the teaching, the Saṅgha,
the path, or the practice. Even the last of these five hundred
mendicants is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the
underworld, bound for awakening."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.77 Unthinkable *Acinteyyasutta*

"Mendicants, these four things are unthinkable. They should not be
thought about, and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or
get frustrated. What four?

The domain of the Buddhas ...

The domain of one in absorption ...

The results of deeds ...

Speculation about the world ...

These are the four unthinkable things. They should not be thought about,
and anyone who tries to think about them will go mad or get frustrated."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.78 A Religious Donation *Dakkhiṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four ways of purifying a religious
donation. What four? There's a religious donation that's purified by the
giver, not the recipient. There's a religious donation that's purified
by the recipient, not the giver. There's a religious donation that's
purified by neither the giver nor the recipient. There's a religious
donation that's purified by both the giver and the recipient.

And how is a religious donation purified by the giver, not the
recipient? It's when the giver is ethical, of good character, but the
recipient is unethical, of bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by the recipient, not the
giver? It's when the giver is unethical, of bad character, but the
recipient is ethical, of good character.

And how is a religious donation purified by neither the giver nor the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are unethical, of
bad character.

And how is a religious donation purified by both the giver and the
recipient? It's when both the giver and the recipient are ethical, of
good character.

These are the four ways of purifying a religious donation."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.79 Business *Vaṇijjasutta*

Then Venerable Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why for different people the
same kind of business undertaking might fail, while another doesn't meet
expectations, another meets expectations, and another exceeds
expectations?"

"Sāriputta, take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or
brahmin and invites them to ask for what they need. But they fail to
give what's requested. When they've passed away from that life, if
they're reborn in this place, whatever business they undertake fails.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, but don't meet
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake doesn't meet
expectations.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, meeting
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake meets expectations.

Take a case where someone goes to an ascetic or brahmin and invites them
to ask for what they need. They give what's requested, exceeding
expectations. When they've passed away from that life, if they're reborn
in this place, whatever business they undertake exceeds expectations.

This is the cause, this is the reason why for different people the same
kind of business undertaking might fail, while another doesn't meet
expectations, another meets expectations, and another exceeds
expectations."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.80 Persia *Kambojasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed,
sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why females don't attend
council meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia?"

"Ānanda, females are irritable, jealous, stingy, and unintelligent. This
is the cause, this is the reason why females don't attend council
meetings, work for a living, or travel to Persia."

