# The Chapter on Ways of Performing Deeds


### N 4.264 Killing Living Creatures *Pāṇātipātīsutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They themselves kill living creatures; they encourage others to
kill living creatures; they approve of killing living creatures; and
they praise killing living creatures. Someone with these four qualities
is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They
don't themselves kill living creatures; they encourage others to not
kill living creatures; they approve of not killing living creatures; and
they praise not killing living creatures. Someone with these four
qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.265 Stealing *Adinnādāyīsutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They themselves steal ... Someone with four qualities is raised up
to heaven. ...

They don't themselves steal ... "

<!--pg-->
### N 4.266 Misconduct *Micchācārīsutta*

"... They themselves commit sexual misconduct ...

They themselves don't commit sexual misconduct ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.267 Lying *Musāvādīsutta*

"... They themselves lie ...

... They themselves don't lie ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.268 Divisive Speech *Pisuṇavācāsutta*

"... They themselves speak divisively ...

... They themselves don't speak divisively ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.269 Harsh Speech *Pharusavācāsutta*

"... They themselves speak harshly ...

... They themselves don't speak harshly ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.270 Talking Nonsense *Samphappalāpasutta*

"... They themselves talk nonsense ...

... They themselves don't talk nonsense ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.271 Covetousness *Abhijjhālusutta*

"... They themselves are covetous ...

... They themselves are content ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.272 Ill Will *Byāpannacittasutta*

"... They themselves have ill will ...

... They themselves have good will ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.273 Wrong View *Micchādiṭṭhisutta*

"... They themselves have wrong view ...

They themselves have right view; they encourage others to have right
view; they approve of right view; and they praise right view. Someone
with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

## Abbreviated Texts Beginning with Greed

<!--pg-->
### N 4.274 Mindfulness Meditation *Satipaṭṭhānasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the
body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for
the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings ... mind ...
principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.275 Right Efforts *Sammappadhānasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
Firstly, a mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort,
exerts the mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't
arise. ...so that unskillful qualities that have arisen are given up ...
so that skillful qualities arise ... so that skillful qualities that
have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase, mature, and are
fulfilled by development. For insight into greed, these four things
should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.276 Bases of Psychic Power *Iddhipādasutta*

"For insight into greed, four things should be developed. What four?
It's when a mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has
immersion due to enthusiasm, and active effort. They develop the basis
of psychic power that has immersion due to energy ... mental development
... inquiry, and active effort. For insight into greed, these four
things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.277--303 Complete Understanding, Etc. *Pariññādisutta*

"For the complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ... ending
... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ... letting
go of greed, four things should be developed."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.304--783 Insight into Hate, Etc. *Dosaabhiññādisutta*

"Of hate ... delusion ... anger ... acrimony ... disdain ... contempt
... jealousy ... stinginess ... deceit ... deviousness ... obstinacy ...
aggression ... conceit ... arrogance ... vanity ... negligence ... for
insight ... complete understanding ... finishing ... giving up ...
ending ... vanishing ... fading away ... cessation ... giving away ...
letting go ... four things should be developed."

::: Center
THE BOOK OF THE FOURS IS FINISHED.
:::

## Colophon

<!--pg-->
### The Translator

Bhikkhu Sujato was born as Anthony Aidan Best on 4/11/1966 in Perth,
Western Australia. He grew up in the pleasant suburbs of Mt Lawley and
Attadale alongside his sister Nicola, who was the good child. His
mother, Margaret Lorraine Huntsman née Pinder, said "he'll either be a
priest or a poet", while his father, Anthony Thomas Best, advised him to
"never do anything for money". He attended Aquinas College, a Catholic
school, where he decided to become an atheist. At the University of WA
he studied philosophy, aiming to learn what he wanted to do with his
life. Finding that what he wanted to do was play guitar, he dropped out.
His main band was named Martha's Vineyard, which achieved modest success
in the indie circuit.

A seemingly random encounter with a roadside joey took him to Thailand,
where he entered his first meditation retreat at Wat Ram Poeng, Chieng
Mai in 1992. Feeling the call to the Buddha's path, he took full
ordination in Wat Pa Nanachat in 1994, where his teachers were Ajahn
Pasanno and Ajahn Jayasaro. In 1997 he returned to Perth to study with
Ajahn Brahm at Bodhinyana Monastery.

He spent several years practicing in seclusion in Malaysia and Thailand
before establishing Santi Forest Monastery in Bundanoon, NSW, in 2003.
There he was instrumental in supporting the establishment of the
Theravada bhikkhuni order in Australia and advocating for women's
rights. He continues to teach in Australia and globally, with a special
concern for the moral implications of climate change and other forms of
environmental destruction. He has published a series of books of
original and groundbreaking research on early Buddhism.

In 2005 he founded SuttaCentral together with Rod Bucknell and John
Kelly. In 2015, seeing the need for a complete, accurate, plain English
translation of the Pali texts, he undertook the task, spending nearly
three years in isolation on the isle of Qi Mei off the coast of the
nation of Taiwan. He completed the four main Nikāyas in
2018, and the early books of the Khuddaka Nikāya were
complete by 2021. All this work is dedicated to the public domain and is
entirely free of copyright encumbrance.

In 2019 he returned to Sydney where he established Lokanta Vihara (The
Monastery at the End of the World).

<!--pg-->
### Creation Process

Primary source was the digital Mahāsaṅgīti edition of the
Pali Tipiṭaka. Translated from the Pali, with reference to
several English translations, especially those of Bhikkhu Bodhi.

<!--pg-->
### The Translation

This translation was part of a project to translate the four Pali
Nikāyas with the following aims: plain, approachable
English; consistent terminology; accurate rendition of the Pali; free of
copyright. It was made during 2016--2018 while Bhikkhu Sujato was
staying in Qimei, Taiwan.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral

SuttaCentral publishes early Buddhist texts. Since 2005 we have provided
root texts in Pali, Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and other languages,
parallels between these texts, and translations in many modern
languages. Building on the work of generations of scholars, we offer our
contribution freely.

SuttaCentral is driven by volunteer contributions, and in addition we
employ professional developers. We offer a sponsorship program for high
quality translations from the original languages. Financial support for
SuttaCentral is handled by the SuttaCentral Development Trust, a
charitable trust registered in Australia.

<!--pg-->
### About Bilara

"Bilara" means "cat" in Pali, and it is the name of our Computer
Assisted Translation (CAT) software. Bilara is a web app that enables
translators to translate early Buddhist texts into their own language.
These translations are published on SuttaCentral with the root text and
translation side by side.

<!--pg-->
### About SuttaCentral Editions

The SuttaCentral Editions project makes high quality books from selected
Bilara translations. These are published in formats including HTML,
EPUB, PDF, and print.

You are welcome to print any of our Editions.
