# The Chapter on Assemblies


### N 4.211 Assembly *Parisāsutta*

"Mendicants, these four corrupt an assembly. What four? A monk, nun,
layman, or laywoman who is unethical, of bad character. These are the
four that corrupt an assembly.

Mendicants, these four beautify an assembly. What four? A monk, nun,
layman, or laywoman who is ethical, of good character. These are the
four that beautify an assembly."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.212 View *Diṭṭhisutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and wrong view.
Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and right view. Someone with
these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.213 Ungrateful *Akataññutāsutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? Bad conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being ungrateful
and thankless. Someone with these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? Good
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being grateful and
thankful. Someone with these four qualities is raised up to heaven."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.214 Killing Living Creatures *Pāṇātipātīsutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. ... Someone with
four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They don't kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.215 Path (1st) *Paṭhamamaggasutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action. ... Someone with four qualities is
raised up to heaven. ... right view, right thought, right speech, right
action. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.216 Path (2nd) *Dutiyamaggasutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... wrong livelihood,
wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. Someone with four
qualities is raised up to heaven. ... right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.217 Kinds of Expression (1st) *Paṭhamavohārapathasutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they haven't. ... Someone
with four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They say they haven't
seen, heard, thought, or known something, and they haven't. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.218 Kinds of Expression (2nd) *Dutiyavohārapathasutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They say they
haven't seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they have. ...
Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, and they have. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.219 Lack of Conscience *Ahirikasutta*

"Someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. ... They're
faithless, unethical, shameless, and imprudent. ... Someone with four
qualities is raised up to heaven. ... They're faithful, ethical,
conscientious, and prudent. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.220 Unethical *Dussīlasutta*

"Mendicants, someone with four qualities is cast down to hell. What
four? They're faithless, unethical, lazy, and witless. Someone with
these four qualities is cast down to hell.

Someone with four qualities is raised up to heaven. What four? They're
faithful, ethical, energetic, and wise. Someone with these four
qualities is raised up to heaven."

