# The Chapter on Bad Conduct


### N 4.221 Verbal Conduct *Duccaritasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.
What four? Speech that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. These
are the four kinds of bad conduct by way of speech.

There are these four kinds of good conduct by way of speech. What four?
Speech that's true, harmonious, gentle, and thoughtful. These are the
four kinds of good conduct by way of speech."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.222 View *Diṭṭhisutta*

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four? Bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and wrong view. When a
foolish, incompetent untrue person has these four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness.

When an astute, competent true person has four qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit. What four?
Good conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and right view. When an
astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.223 Ungrateful *Akataññutāsutta*

"When a foolish, incompetent untrue person has four qualities they keep
themselves broken and damaged. They deserve to be blamed and criticized
by sensible people, and they create much wickedness. What four? Bad
conduct by way of body, speech, and mind, and being ungrateful and
thankless. An astute person ... creates much merit. ... Good conduct by
way of body, speech, and mind, and being grateful and thankful. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.224 Killing Living Creatures *Pāṇātipātīsutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They kill living
creatures, steal, commit sexual misconduct, and lie. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... They don't kill living creatures,
steal, commit sexual misconduct, or lie. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.225 Path (1st) *Paṭhamamaggasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... wrong view, wrong
thought, wrong speech, wrong action. ... An astute person ... creates
much merit. ... right view, right thought, right speech, right action.
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.226 Path (2nd) *Dutiyamaggasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... wrong livelihood,
wrong effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong immersion. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.227 Kinds of Expression (1st) *Paṭhamavohārapathasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They say they've
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they haven't. ... An
astute person ... creates much merit. ... They say they haven't seen,
heard, thought, or known something, and they haven't. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.228 Kinds of Expression (2nd) *Dutiyavohārapathasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They say they haven't
seen, heard, thought, or known something, but they have. ... An astute
person ... creates much merit. ... They say they've seen, heard,
thought, or known something, and they have. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.229 Lack of Conscience *Ahirikasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They're faithless,
unethical, shameless, and imprudent. ... An astute person ... creates
much merit. ... They're faithful, ethical, conscientious, and prudent.
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.230 Witless *Duppaññasutta*

"A foolish person ... creates much wickedness. ... They're faithless,
unethical, lazy, and witless. ... An astute person ... creates much
merit. ... They're faithful, ethical, energetic, and wise. When an
astute, competent true person has these four qualities they keep
themselves intact and unscathed. They don't deserve to be blamed and
criticized by sensible people, and they create much merit."

<!--pg-->
### N 4.231 Poets *Kavisutta*

"Mendicants, there are these four poets. What four?

A poet who thoughtfully composes their own work, a poet who repeats the
oral transmission, a poet who educates, and a poet who improvises.

These are the four poets."

