# The Chapter on Five Factors

### N 5.21 Disrespect (1st)  *Paṭhamaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill ethics. Without
fulfilling ethics, it's impossible to fulfill right view. Without
fulfilling right view, it's impossible to fulfill right immersion.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill ethics. Having fulfilled ethics, it's
possible to fulfill right view. Having fulfilled right view, it's
possible to fulfill right immersion."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.22 Disrespect (2nd)  *Dutiyaagāravasutta*

"Mendicants, it is quite impossible for a disrespectful and irreverent
mendicant with incompatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing
with supplementary regulations regarding their spiritual companions.
Without fulfilling the practice dealing with supplementary regulations,
it's impossible to fulfill the practice of a trainee. Without fulfilling
the practice of a trainee, it's impossible to fulfill the entire
spectrum of ethics. Without fulfilling the entire spectrum of ethics,
it's impossible to fulfill the entire spectrum of immersion. Without
fulfilling the entire spectrum of immersion, it's impossible to fulfill
the entire spectrum of wisdom.

But it is quite possible for a respectful and reverent mendicant with
compatible lifestyle to fulfill the practice dealing with supplementary
regulations regarding their spiritual companions. Having fulfilled the
practice dealing with supplementary regulations, it's possible to
fulfill the practice of a trainee. Having fulfilled the practice of a
trainee, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of ethics. Having
fulfilled the entire spectrum of ethics, it's possible to fulfill the
entire spectrum of immersion. Having fulfilled the entire spectrum of
immersion, it's possible to fulfill the entire spectrum of wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.23 Corruptions  *Upakkilesasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five corruptions of native gold. When
native gold is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or
radiant, but is brittle and not completely ready for working. What five?
Iron, copper, tin, lead, and silver. When native gold is corrupted by
these five corruptions it's not pliable, workable, or radiant, but is
brittle and not completely ready for working.

But when native gold is free of these five corruptions it becomes
pliable, workable, and radiant, not brittle, and ready to be worked.
Then the goldsmith can successfully create any kind of ornament they
want, whether a ring, earrings, a necklace, or a golden garland.

In the same way, there are these five corruptions of the mind. When the
mind is corrupted by these it's not pliable, workable, or radiant. It's
brittle, and not rightly immersed in samādhi for the ending
of defilements. What five? Sensual desire, ill will, dullness and
drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. These are the five
corruptions of the mind. When the mind is corrupted by these it's not
pliable, workable, or radiant. It's brittle, and not rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements.

But when the mind is free of these five corruptions it's pliable,
workable, and radiant. It's not brittle, and is rightly immersed in
samādhi for the ending of defilements. You become capable
of realizing anything that can be realized by insight to which you
extend the mind, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power---multiplying
myself and becoming one again; appearing and disappearing; going
unobstructed through a wall, a rampart, or a mountain as if through
space; diving in and out of the earth as if it were water; walking on
water as if it were earth; flying cross-legged through the sky like a
bird; touching and stroking with the hand the sun and moon, so mighty
and powerful, controlling the body as far as the realm of divinity.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi
as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in
samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' You're
capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives. That is: one,
two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a
thousand, a hundred thousand rebirths; many eons of the world
contracting, many eons of the world expanding, many eons of the world
contracting and expanding. May I remember: "There, I was named this, my
clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food. This was how I
felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended. When I passed
away from that place I was reborn somewhere else. There, too, I was
named this, my clan was that, I looked like this, and that was my food.
This was how I felt pleasure and pain, and that was how my life ended.
When I passed away from that place I was reborn here." May I recollect
my many past lives, with features and details.' You're capable of
realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn---inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, in a good place or a bad place---and
understand how sentient beings are reborn according to their deeds:
"These dear beings did bad things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
denounced the noble ones; they had wrong view; and they chose to act out
of that wrong view. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell. These dear
beings, however, did good things by way of body, speech, and mind. They
never denounced the noble ones; they had right view; and they chose to
act out of that right view. When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm." And so, with
clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I see sentient beings
passing away and being reborn---inferior and superior, beautiful and
ugly, in a good place or a bad place. And may I understand how sentient
beings are reborn according to their deeds.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.24 Unethical  *Dussīlasutta*

"Mendicants, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that lacked branches and foliage. Its shoots,
bark, softwood, and heartwood would not grow to fullness.

In the same way, an unethical person, who lacks ethics, has destroyed a
vital condition for right immersion. When there is no right immersion,
one who lacks right immersion has destroyed a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is no true knowledge and vision, one
who lacks true knowledge and vision has destroyed a vital condition for
disillusionment and dispassion. When there is no disillusionment and
dispassion, one who lacks disillusionment and dispassion has destroyed a
vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

An ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has fulfilled a vital
condition for right immersion. When there is right immersion, one who
has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital condition for true
knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge and vision, one who
has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has fulfilled a vital condition
for disillusionment and dispassion. When there is disillusionment and
dispassion, one who has fulfilled disillusionment and dispassion has
fulfilled a vital condition for knowledge and vision of freedom.

Suppose there was a tree that was complete with branches and foliage.
Its shoots, bark, softwood, and heartwood would all grow to fullness.

In the same way, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethics, has
fulfilled a vital condition for right immersion. When there is right
immersion, one who has fulfilled right immersion has fulfilled a vital
condition for true knowledge and vision. When there is true knowledge
and vision, one who has fulfilled true knowledge and vision has
fulfilled a vital condition for disillusionment and dispassion. When
there is disillusionment and dispassion, one who has fulfilled
disillusionment and dispassion has fulfilled a vital condition for
knowledge and vision of freedom."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.25 Supported  *Anuggahitasutta*

"Mendicants, when right view is supported by five factors it has freedom
of heart and freedom by wisdom as its fruit and benefit.

What five? It's when right view is supported by ethics, learning,
discussion, serenity, and discernment. When right view is supported by
these five factors it has freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom as its
fruit and benefit."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.26 Opportunities for Freedom  *Vimuttāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five opportunities for freedom. If a
mendicant stays diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind
is freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. What five?

Firstly, the Teacher or a respected spiritual companion teaches Dhamma
to a mendicant. In whatever way the Teacher or a respected spiritual
companion teaches Dhamma to that mendicant, they always feel inspired by
the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy
springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of
rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels
bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed in
samādhi. This is the first opportunity for freedom. If a
mendicant stays diligent, keen, and resolute at this time, their mind is
freed, their defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke.

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor a respected
spiritual companion teaches Dhamma to a mendicant. But the mendicant
teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they learned and memorized it. In
whatever way that mendicant teaches Dhamma in detail to others as they
learned and memorized it, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the
second opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma. But the mendicant recites the teaching in detail as they
learned and memorized it. In whatever way that mendicant recites the
teaching in detail as they learned and memorized it, they always feel
inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling
inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the third opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching. But the
mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their heart,
examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it. In whatever
way that mendicant thinks about and considers the teaching in their
heart, examining it with the mind as they learned and memorized it, they
always feel inspired by the meaning and the teaching in that Dhamma.
Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When
the mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is the fourth opportunity for freedom. ...

Furthermore, it may be that neither the Teacher nor ... the mendicant
teaches Dhamma ... nor does the mendicant recite the teaching ... or
think about it. But a meditation subject as a basis of immersion is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom. In whatever way a mendicant's meditation subject as a basis of
immersion is properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and
comprehended with wisdom, they always feel inspired by the meaning and
the teaching in that Dhamma. Feeling inspired, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. This is the
fifth opportunity for freedom. ...

These are the five opportunities for freedom. If a mendicant stays
diligent, keen, and resolute at these times, their mind is freed, their
defilements are ended, and they arrive at the supreme sanctuary from the
yoke."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.27 Immersion  *Samādhisutta*

"Mendicants, develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you
develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful, five knowledges arise
for you personally. What five?

'This immersion is blissful now, and results in bliss in the future.'
...

'This immersion is noble and not of the flesh.' ...

'This immersion is not cultivated by sinners.' ...

'This immersion is peaceful and sublime and tranquil and unified, not
held in place by forceful suppression.' ...

'I mindfully enter into and emerge from this immersion.' ...

Develop limitless immersion, alert and mindful. When you develop
limitless immersion, alert and mindful, these five knowledges arise for
you personally."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.28 With Five Factors  *Pañcaṅgikasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you how to develop noble right immersion with
five factors. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how do you develop noble right immersion with five factors?

Firstly, a mendicant, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unskillful qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption.
It has the rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind
and keeping it connected. They drench, steep, fill, and spread their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. It's
like when a deft bathroom attendant or their apprentice pours bath
powder into a bronze dish, sprinkling it little by little with water.
They knead it until the ball of bath powder is soaked and saturated with
moisture, spread through inside and out; yet no moisture oozes out. In
the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads their
body with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. There's no part of the
body that's not spread with rapture and bliss born of seclusion. This is
the first way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, a mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption. It has
the rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind
at one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with rapture and bliss born of
immersion. There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture
and bliss born of immersion. It's like a deep lake fed by spring water.
There's no inlet to the east, west, north, or south, and the heavens
would not properly bestow showers from time to time. But the stream of
cool water welling up in the lake drenches, steeps, fills, and spreads
throughout the lake. There's no part of the lake that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with rapture and bliss born of immersion.
There's no part of the body that's not spread with rapture and bliss
born of immersion. This is the second way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption. They meditate with equanimity, mindful
and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones
declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' They drench,
steep, fill, and spread their body with bliss free of rapture. There's
no part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. It's
like a pool with blue water lilies, or pink or white lotuses. Some of
them sprout and grow in the water without rising above it, thriving
underwater. From the tip to the root they're drenched, steeped, filled,
and soaked with cool water. There's no part of them that's not spread
through with cool water. In the same way, a mendicant drenches, steeps,
fills, and spreads their body with bliss free of rapture. There's no
part of the body that's not spread with bliss free of rapture. This is
the third way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former happiness
and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth absorption. It
is without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and mindfulness. They
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. It's like someone
sitting wrapped from head to foot with white cloth. There's no part of
the body that's not spread over with white cloth. In the same way, they
sit spreading their body through with pure bright mind. There's no part
of the body that's not spread with pure bright mind. This is the fourth
way to develop noble right immersion with five factors.

Furthermore, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is properly
grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with wisdom by a
mendicant. It's like when someone views someone else. Someone standing
might view someone sitting, or someone sitting might view someone lying
down. In the same way, the meditation that is a basis for reviewing is
properly grasped, focused on, borne in mind, and comprehended with
wisdom by a mendicant. This is the fifth way to develop noble right
immersion with five factors.

When the noble right immersion with five factors is developed and
cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to realize by
insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight; and they
are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one is
within range.

Suppose a water jar was placed on a stand, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. If a strong man was to tip it any which way, would
water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to
realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight;
and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one
is within range.

Suppose there was a square, walled lotus pond on level ground, full to
the brim so a crow could drink from it. If a strong man was to open the
wall on any side, would water pour out?"

"Yes, sir."

"In the same way, when noble right immersion with five factors is
developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant extends the mind to
realize by insight each and every thing that can be realized by insight;
and they are capable of realizing those things, since each and every one
is within range.

Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad ready. A deft horse trainer, a master
charioteer, might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand
and goad in the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes,
whenever he wishes. In the same way, when noble right immersion with
five factors is developed and cultivated in this way, a mendicant
extends the mind to realize by insight each and every thing that can be
realized by insight; and they are capable of realizing those things,
since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I wield the many kinds of psychic power: multiplying
myself and becoming one again ... controlling the body as far as the
realm of divinity.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every
one is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairaudience that is purified and superhuman, may I
hear both kinds of sounds, human and heavenly, whether near or far.'
You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within
range.

If you wish: 'May I understand the minds of other beings and
individuals, having comprehended them with my mind. May I understand
mind with greed as "mind with greed", and mind without greed as "mind
without greed"; mind with hate as "mind with hate", and mind without
hate as "mind without hate"; mind with delusion as "mind with delusion",
and mind without delusion as "mind without delusion"; constricted mind
as "constricted mind", and scattered mind as "scattered mind"; expansive
mind as "expansive mind", and unexpansive mind as "unexpansive mind";
mind that is not supreme as "mind that is not supreme", and mind that is
supreme as "mind that is supreme"; mind immersed in samādhi
as "mind immersed in samādhi", and mind not immersed in
samādhi as "mind not immersed in samādhi";
freed mind as "freed mind", and unfreed mind as "unfreed mind".' You're
capable of realizing it, since each and every one is within range.

If you wish: 'May I recollect many kinds of past lives, with features
and details.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one
is within range.

If you wish: 'With clairvoyance that is purified and superhuman, may I
see sentient beings passing away and being reborn according to their
deeds.' You're capable of realizing it, since each and every one is
within range.

If you wish: 'May I realize the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom
by wisdom in this very life, and live having realized it with my own
insight due to the ending of defilements.' You're capable of realizing
it, since each and every one is within range."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.29 Walking Meditation  *Caṅkamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are five benefits of walking meditation. What five?
You get fit for traveling, fit for striving in meditation, and healthy.
What's eaten, drunk, chewed, and tasted is properly digested. And
immersion gained while walking lasts long. These are the five benefits
of walking meditation."

<!--pg-->
### N 5.30 With Nāgita  *Nāgitasutta*

SO I HAVE HEARD. At one time the Buddha was wandering in
the land of the Kosalans together with a large Saṅgha of
mendicants when he arrived at a village of the Kosalan brahmins named
Icchānaṅgala. He stayed in a forest near
Icchānaṅgala. The brahmins and householders of
Icchānaṅgala heard:

"It seems the ascetic Gotama---a Sakyan, gone forth from a Sakyan
family---has arrived at Icchānaṅgala. He is staying in a
forest near Icchānaṅgala. He has this good reputation:
'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in
knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of the world, supreme guide for
those who wish to train, teacher of gods and humans, awakened, blessed.'
He has realized with his own insight this world---with its gods,
Māras, and divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, gods and humans---and he makes it known to others. He
proclaims a teaching that is good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a
spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. It's good to see such
perfected ones."

Then, when the night had passed, they took many fresh and cooked foods
and went to the forest near Icchānaṅgala, where they stood
outside the gates making a dreadful racket.

Now, at that time Venerable Nāgita was the Buddha's
attendant. Then the Buddha said to Nāgita,
"Nāgita, who's making that dreadful racket? You'd think it
was fishermen hauling in a catch!"

"Sir, it's these brahmins and householders of Icchānaṅgala.
They've brought many fresh and cooked foods, and they're standing
outside the gates wanting to offer it specially to the Buddha and the
mendicant Saṅgha."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity."

"Sir, may the Blessed One please relent now! May the Holy One relent!
Now is the time for the Buddha to relent. Wherever the Buddha now goes,
the brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will
incline the same way. It's like when the heavens rain heavily and the
water flows downhill. In the same way, wherever the Buddha now goes, the
brahmins and householders, and people of town and country will incline
the same way. Why is that? Because of the Buddha's ethics and wisdom."

"Nāgita, may I never become famous. May fame not come to
me. There are those who can't get the pleasure of renunciation, the
pleasure of seclusion, the pleasure of peace, the pleasure of awakening
when they want, without trouble or difficulty like I can. Let them enjoy
the filthy, lazy pleasure of possessions, honor, and popularity.

What you eat, drink, chew, and taste ends up as excrement and urine.
This is its outcome.

When loved ones decay and perish, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress arise. This is its outcome.

When you pursue meditation on the feature of ugliness, revulsion at the
feature of beauty becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing impermanence in the six fields of contact,
revulsion at contact becomes stabilized. This is its outcome.

When you meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping
aggregates, revulsion at grasping becomes stabilized. This is its
outcome."

