SUTTA 95

[^880]: The opening passage of this sutta, down to §10, is virtually identical with the opening of the Sonadanda Sutta (DN 4).

[^881]: MA: It was called thus because offerings were made there to the gods.

[^882]: Another wealthy brahmin who resided in Ukkatha, a crown property given to him by King Pasenadi. At DN 2.21/i.110 he hears a discourse from the Buddha, attains stream-entry, and goes for refuge along with his family and retinue.

[^883]: These are the ancient rishis whom the brahmins regarded as the divinely inspired authors of the Vedic hymns.

[^884]: In Pali: saddhā, ruci, anussava, akāraparivitakka, ditṭhinijjhānakkhanti. Of these five grounds for arriving at a conviction, the first two seem to be primarily emotive, the third to be a blind acceptance of tradition, and the last two primarily rational or cognitive. The "two different ways" each may turn out are true and false.

[^885]: It is not proper for him to come to this conclusion because he has not personally ascertained the truth of his conviction but only accepts it on a ground that is not capable of yielding certainty.

[^886]: Saccānurakkhana: or, the safeguarding of truth, the protection of truth.

[^887]: Saccānubodha: or, the awakening to truth.

[^888]: The procedure for the discovery of truth recommended in this sutta appears to be an elaboration of the approach described in MN 47.

[^889]: Tületi. MA: He investigates things in terms of impermanence, and so forth. This stage thus seems to be that of insight contemplation.

[^890]: Although applying the will (ussahati) appears similar to striving (padahati), the former may be understood as the exertion undertaken prior to insight contemplation, the latter as the exertion that brings insight up to the level of the supramundane path.

[^891]: MA: He realises Nibbāna with the mental body (of the path of stream-entry), and having penetrated the defilements, he sees Nibbāna with wisdom, making it clear and evident.

[^892]: While the discovery of truth in this context appears to signify the attainment of stream-entry, the final arrival at truth (saccānuppatti) seems to mean the full attainment of arahantship.

[^893]: See n. 524 .

