# Linked Discourses on Comprehension

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Comprehension

### SN 13.1 A Fingernail *Nakhasikhāsutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.

Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail,
addressed the mendicants: "What do you think, mendicants? Which is more:
the little bit of dirt under my fingernail, or this great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is far more. The little bit of dirt under your
fingernail is tiny. Compared to the great earth, it's not nearly a
hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple accomplished in view, a person
with comprehension, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it's not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or
a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives.
That's how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching and gain the
vision of the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.2 A Lotus Pond *Pokkharaṇīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose there was a lotus pond that was fifty leagues long,
fifty leagues wide, and fifty leagues deep, full to the brim so a crow
could drink from it. Then a person would pick up some water on the tip
of a blade of grass.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water on the tip of
the blade of grass, or the water in the lotus pond?"

"Sir, the water in the lotus pond is certainly more. The water on the
tip of a blade of grass is tiny. Compared to the water in the lotus
pond, it's not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth
part."

"In the same way, for a person with comprehension, a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it's not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or
a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives.
That's how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching and gain the
vision of the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.3 Where the Waters Flow Together *Sambhejjaudakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are places where the great rivers---the Ganges,
Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---come together and converge. Suppose a person was to
draw two or three drops of water from such a place.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the two or three drops
drawn out or the water in the confluence?"

"Sir, the water in the confluence is certainly more. The two or three
drops drawn out are tiny. Compared to the water in the confluence, it's
not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.4 Where the Waters Flow Together (2nd) *Dutiyasambhejjaudakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are places where the great rivers---the Ganges,
Yamuna, Aciravatī, Sarabhū, and
Mahī---come together and converge. Suppose that water dried
up and evaporated except for two or three drops.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water in the
confluence that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops
left?"

"Sir, the water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated is
certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the
water in the confluence that has dried up and evaporated, it's not
nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.5 The Earth *Pathavīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place seven clay balls the size of
jujube seeds on the great earth.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven clay balls the
size of jujube seeds, or the great earth?"

"Sir, the great earth is certainly more. The seven clay balls the size
of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared to the great earth, it's not nearly a
hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.6 The Earth (2nd) *Dutiyapathavīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose the great earth was worn away and eroded except for
seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the great earth that has
been worn away and eroded, or the seven clay balls the size of jujube
seeds that are left?"

"Sir, the great earth that has been worn away and eroded is certainly
more. The seven clay balls the size of jujube seeds are tiny. Compared
to the great earth that has been worn away and eroded, it's not nearly a
hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.7 The Ocean *Samuddasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a man was to draw up two or three drops of water
from the ocean.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the two or three drops
drawn out or the water in the ocean?"

"Sir, the water in the ocean is certainly more. The two or three drops
drawn out are tiny. Compared to the water in the ocean, it's not nearly
a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.8 The Ocean (2nd) *Dutiyasamuddasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose the water in the ocean dried up and evaporated
except for two or three drops.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the water in the ocean
that has dried up and evaporated, or the two or three drops left?"

"Sir, the water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated is
certainly more. The two or three drops left are tiny. Compared to the
water in the ocean that has dried up and evaporated, it's not nearly a
hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.9 A Mountain *Pabbatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place seven pebbles the size of
mustard seeds on the Himalayas, the king of mountains.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size
of mustard seeds, or the Himalayas, the king of mountains?"

"Sir, the Himalayas, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven
pebbles the size of mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas,
it's not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth
part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple, the suffering that's over and
done with is more ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.10 A Mountain (2nd) *Dutiyapabbatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose the Himalayas, the king of mountains, was worn away
and eroded except for seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the portion of the
Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been worn away and eroded, or
the seven pebbles the size of mustard seeds that are left?"

"Sir, the portion of the Himalayas, the king of mountains, that has been
worn away and eroded is certainly more. The seven pebbles the size of
mustard seeds are tiny. Compared to the Himalayas, it's not nearly a
hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, for a noble disciple accomplished in view, a person
with comprehension, the suffering that's over and done with is more,
what's left is tiny. Compared to the mass of suffering in the past
that's over and done with, it's not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or
a hundred thousandth part, since there are at most seven more lives.
That's how very beneficial it is to comprehend the teaching and gain the
vision of the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### SN 13.11 A Mountain (3rd) *Tatiyapabbatasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, suppose a person was to place down on Sineru, the king of
mountains, seven pebbles the size of mung beans.

What do you think, mendicants? Which is more: the seven pebbles the size
of mung beans, or Sineru, the king of mountains?"

"Sir, Sineru, the king of mountains, is certainly more. The seven
pebbles the size of mung beans are tiny. Compared to Sineru, it's not
nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or a hundred thousandth part."

"In the same way, compared with the achievements of a noble disciple
accomplished in view, the achievements of the ascetics, brahmins, and
wanderers of other religions is not nearly a hundredth, a thousandth, or
a hundred thousandth part. So great is the achievement of the person
accomplished in view, so great is their direct knowledge."



