# Linked Discourses on the Aggregates

**the first fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Nakula's Father

### SN 22.1 Nakula's Father *Nakulapitusutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Bhaggas at Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at
Bhesakaḷā's Wood.

Then the householder Nakula's father went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, I'm an old man, elderly and senior. I'm advanced in years and have
reached the final stage of life. My body is ailing and I'm constantly
unwell. I hardly ever get to see the esteemed mendicants. May the Buddha
please advise me and instruct me. It will be for my lasting welfare and
happiness."

"That's so true, householder! That's so true, householder! For this body
is ailing, swaddled in its shell. If anyone dragging around this body
claimed to be healthy even for an hour, what is that but foolishness?

So you should train like this: 'Though my body is ailing, my mind will
be healthy.' That's how you should train."

And then the householder Nakula's father approved and agreed with what
the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right. Then he went up to
Venerable Sāriputta, bowed, and sat down to one side.
Sāriputta said to him:

"Householder, your faculties are so very clear, and your complexion is
pure and bright. Did you get to hear a Dhamma talk in the Buddha's
presence today?"

"What else, sir, could it possibly be? Just now the Buddha anointed me
with the deathless ambrosia of a Dhamma talk."

"But what kind of ambrosial Dhamma talk has the Buddha anointed you
with?"

So Nakula's father told Sāriputta all that had happened,
and said, "That's the ambrosial Dhamma talk that the Buddha anointed me
with."

"But didn't you feel the need to ask the Buddha the further question:
'Sir, how do you define someone ailing in body and ailing in mind, and
someone ailing in body and healthy in mind'?"

"Sir, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this statement
in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May Venerable
Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of this."

"Well then, householder, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," replied Nakula's father. Sāriputta said this:

"And how is a person ailing in body and ailing in mind? It's when an
unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither
skilled nor trained in the qualities of a noble one. They've not seen
true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the qualities of a
true person. They regard form as self, self as having form, form in
self, or self in form. They're obsessed with the thought: 'I am form,
form is mine!' But that form of theirs decays and perishes, which gives
rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in self, or
self in feeling. They're obsessed with the thought: 'I am feeling,
feeling is mine!' But that feeling of theirs decays and perishes, which
gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They regard perception as self, self as having perception, perception in
self, or self in perception. They're obsessed with the thought: 'I am
perception, perception is mine!' But that perception of theirs decays
and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress.

They regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in self, or
self in choices. They're obsessed with the thought: 'I am choices,
choices are mine!' But those choices of theirs decay and perish, which
gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. They're obsessed with
the thought: 'I am consciousness, consciousness is mine!' But that
consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

That's how a person is ailing in body and ailing in mind.

And how is a person ailing in body and healthy in mind? It's when a
learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They're not obsessed with the thought: 'I am form, form is mine!'
So when that form of theirs decays and perishes, it doesn't give rise to
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They don't regard feeling as self, self as having feeling, feeling in
self, or self in feeling. They're not obsessed with the thought: 'I am
feeling, feeling is mine!' So when that feeling of theirs decays and
perishes, it doesn't give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress.

They don't regard perception as self, self as having perception,
perception in self, or self in perception. They're not obsessed with the
thought: 'I am perception, perception is mine!' So when that perception
of theirs decays and perishes, it doesn't give rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They don't regard choices as self, self as having choices, choices in
self, or self in choices. They're not obsessed with the thought: 'I am
choices, choices are mine!' So when those choices of theirs decay and
perish, it doesn't give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress.

They don't regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. They're not obsessed
with the thought: 'I am consciousness, consciousness is mine!' So when
that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, it doesn't give rise
to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

That's how a person is ailing in body and healthy in mind."

That's what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, Nakula's
father approved what Sāriputta said.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.2 At Devadaha *Devadahasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Sakyans, where they have a town named Devadaha.

Then several mendicants who were heading for the west went up to the
Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him, "Sir, we wish to
go to a western land to take up residence there."

"But mendicants, have you taken leave of Sāriputta?"

"No, sir, we haven't."

"You should take leave of Sāriputta. He's astute, and
supports his spiritual companions, the mendicants."

"Yes, sir," they replied.

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was sitting not far
from the Buddha in a clump of golden shower trees. And then those
mendicants approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. They got up
from their seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him
on their right. Then they went up to Venerable Sāriputta,
and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side and said to him, "Reverend Sāriputta, we wish to
go to a western land to take up residence there. We have taken leave of
the Teacher."

"Reverends, there are those who question a mendicant who has gone
abroad---astute aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics---for
astute people are inquisitive: 'But what does the venerables' Teacher
teach? What does he explain?' I trust the venerables have properly
heard, learned, applied the mind, and remembered the teachings, and
penetrated them with wisdom. That way, when answering you will repeat
what the Buddha has said and not misrepresent him with an untruth. You
will explain in line with the teaching, with no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal and criticism."

"Reverend, we would travel a long way to learn the meaning of this
statement in the presence of Venerable Sāriputta. May
Venerable Sāriputta himself please clarify the meaning of
this."

"Well then, reverends, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Sāriputta said this:

"Reverends, there are those who question a mendicant who has gone
abroad---astute aristocrats, brahmins, householders, and ascetics---for
astute people are inquisitive: 'But what does the venerables' Teacher
teach? What does he explain?' When questioned like this, reverends, you
should answer: 'Reverend, our Teacher explained the removal of desire
and lust.'

When you answer like this, such astute people may inquire further: 'But
regarding what does the venerables' teacher explain the removal of
desire and lust?' When questioned like this, reverends, you should
answer: 'Our teacher explains the removal of desire and lust for form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.'

When you answer like this, such astute people may inquire further: 'But
what drawback has he seen that he teaches the removal of desire and lust
for form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?' When
questioned like this, reverends, you should answer: 'If you're not free
of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for form, when
that form decays and perishes it gives rise to sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress. If you're not free of greed, desire,
fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, when that consciousness decays and perishes
it gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. This
is the drawback our Teacher has seen that he teaches the removal of
desire and lust for form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.'

When you answer like this, such astute people may inquire further: 'But
what benefit has he seen that he teaches the removal of desire and lust
for form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?' When
questioned like this, reverends, you should answer: 'If you are rid of
greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for form, when
that form decays and perishes it doesn't give rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. If you are rid of greed,
desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, when that consciousness decays
and perishes it doesn't give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. This is the benefit our Teacher has seen that he teaches
the removal of desire and lust for form, feeling, perception, choices,
and consciousness.'

If those who acquired and kept unskillful qualities were to live happily
in the present life, free of distress, anguish, and fever; and if, when
their body breaks up, after death, they could expect to go to a good
place, the Buddha would not praise giving up unskillful qualities. But
since those who acquire and keep unskillful qualities live unhappily in
the present life, full of distress, anguish, and fever; and since, when
their body breaks up, after death, they can expect to go to a bad place,
the Buddha praises giving up unskillful qualities.

If those who embraced and kept skillful qualities were to live unhappily
in the present life, full of distress, anguish, and fever; and if, when
their body breaks up, after death, they could expect to go to a bad
place, the Buddha would not praise embracing skillful qualities. But
since those who embrace and keep skillful qualities live happily in the
present life, free of distress, anguish, and fever; and since, when
their body breaks up, after death, they can expect to go to a good
place, the Buddha praises embracing skillful qualities."

This is what Venerable Sāriputta said. Satisfied, the
mendicants approved what Sāriputta said.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.3 With Hāliddikāni *Hāliddikānisutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable
Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near
Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable
Mahākaccāna, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him,
"Sir, this was said by the Buddha in the Chapter of the Eights, in 'The
Questions of Māgandiya':

> 'After leaving shelter to migrate without abode,\
> a sage doesn't get close to anyone in town.\
> Rid of sensual pleasures, expecting nothing,\
> they wouldn't get in arguments with people.'

How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Householder, the form element is a shelter for consciousness. One whose
consciousness is shackled by greed for the form element is called a
migrant going from shelter to shelter. The feeling element is a shelter
for consciousness. One whose consciousness is attached to greed for the
feeling element is called a migrant going from shelter to shelter. The
perception element is a shelter for consciousness. One whose
consciousness is attached to greed for the perception element is called
a migrant going from shelter to shelter. The choices element is a
shelter for consciousness. One whose consciousness is attached to greed
for the choices element is called a migrant going from shelter to
shelter. That's how one is a migrant going from shelter to shelter.

And how is one a migrant with no shelter? The Realized One has given up
any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the form element; any
attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying
tendencies. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future. That's why the
Realized One is called a migrant with no shelter. The Realized One has
given up any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the feeling
element ... the perception element ... the choices element ... the
consciousness element; any attraction, grasping, mental fixation,
insistence, and underlying tendencies. He has cut it off at the root,
made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in
the future. That's why the Realized One is called a migrant with no
shelter. That's how one is a migrant with no shelter.

And how is one a migrant going from abode to abode? Attached to drifting
between abodes in pursuit of sights, one is called a migrant going from
abode to abode. Attached to drifting between settlements in pursuit of
sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... thoughts, one is called a
migrant going from abode to abode. That's how one is a migrant going
from abode to abode.

And how is one a migrant without abode? The Realized One has given up
attachment to drifting between abodes in pursuit of sights. He has cut
it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's
unable to arise in the future. That's why the Realized One is called a
migrant without abode. The Realized One has given up attachment to
drifting between settlements in pursuit of sounds ... smells ... tastes
... touches ... ideas. He has cut it off at the root, made it like a
palm stump, obliterated it, so it's unable to arise in the future.
That's why the Realized One is called a migrant without abode. That's
how one is a migrant without abode.

And how does one get close to people in town? It's when someone mixes
closely with laypeople, sharing their joys and sorrows---happy when
they're happy and sad when they're sad---and getting involved in their
business. That's how one gets close to people in town.

And how does one not get close to people in town? It's when a mendicant
doesn't mix closely with laypeople, not sharing their joys and
sorrows---not happy when they're happy or sad when they're sad---and not
getting involved in their business. That's how one doesn't get close to
people in town.

And how is one not rid of sensual pleasures? It's when someone isn't rid
of greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual
pleasures. That's how one is not rid of sensual pleasures.

And how is one rid of sensual pleasures? It's when someone is rid of
greed, desire, fondness, thirst, passion, and craving for sensual
pleasures. That's how one is rid of sensual pleasures.

And how does one have expectations? It's when someone thinks: 'In the
future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such
choices, and such consciousness!' That's how one has expectations.

And how does one expect nothing? It's when someone doesn't think: 'In
the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such
choices, and such consciousness!' That's how one expects nothing.

And how does one argue with people? It's when someone takes part in this
sort of discussion: 'You don't understand this teaching and training. I
understand this teaching and training. What, you understand this
teaching and training? You're practicing wrong. I'm practicing right.
You said last what you should have said first. You said first what you
should have said last. I stay on topic, you don't. What you've thought
so much about has been disproved. Your doctrine is refuted. Go on, save
your doctrine! You're trapped; get yourself out of this---if you can!'
That's how one argues with people.

And how does one not argue with people? It's when a mendicant doesn't
take part in this sort of discussion: 'You don't understand this
teaching and training ... get yourself out of this---if you can!' That's
how one doesn't argue with people.

So, householder, that's how to understand the detailed meaning of what
the Buddha said in brief in the Chapter of the Eights, in 'The Questions
of Māgandiya':

> 'After leaving shelter to migrate without abode,\
> a sage doesn't get close to anyone in town.\
> Rid of sensual pleasures, expecting nothing,\
> they wouldn't get in arguments with people.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.4 Hāliddikāni (2nd) *Dutiyahāliddikānisutta*

So I have heard. At one time Venerable
Mahākaccāna was staying in the land of the Avantis near
Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable
Mahākaccāna ... and asked him, "Sir, this was said by the
Buddha in 'The Questions of Sakka': 'Those ascetics and brahmins who are
freed due to the ending of craving have reached the ultimate goal, the
ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate spiritual life, the
ultimate end, and are best among gods and humans.'

How should we see the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief statement?"

"Householder, consider any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the
form element; any attraction, grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and
underlying tendencies. With the ending, fading away, cessation, giving
away, and letting go of that, the mind is said to be 'well freed'.

Consider any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for the feeling
element ... the perception element ... the choices element ... the
consciousness element; any attraction, grasping, mental fixation,
insistence, and underlying tendencies. With the ending, fading away,
cessation, giving away, and letting go of that, the mind is said to be
'well freed'.

So, householder, that's how to understand the detailed meaning of what
the Buddha said in brief in 'The Questions of Sakka': 'Those ascetics
and brahmins who are freed due to the ending of craving have reached the
ultimate goal, the ultimate sanctuary from the yoke, the ultimate
spiritual life, the ultimate end, and are best among gods and humans.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.5 Development of Immersion *Samādhisutta*

So I have heard. At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, develop immersion. A mendicant who has immersion truly
understands. What do they truly understand? The origin and ending of
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

And what is the origin of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness? It's when a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps
clinging.

What do they approve, welcome, and keep clinging to? They approve,
welcome, and keep clinging to form. This gives rise to relishing.
Relishing forms is grasping. Their grasping is a condition for continued
existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a
condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress to come to be. That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.

They approve, welcome, and keep clinging to feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness. This gives rise to relishing. Relishing
consciousness is grasping. Their grasping is a condition for continued
existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a
condition that gives rise to old age and death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress. That is how this entire mass of suffering
originates.

This is the origin of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

And what is the ending of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness?

It's when a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, or keep clinging.

What don't they approve, welcome, or keep clinging to? They don't
approve, welcome, or keep clinging to form. As a result, relishing of
form ceases. When that relishing ceases, grasping ceases. When grasping
ceases, continued existence ceases. ... That is how this entire mass of
suffering ceases.

They don't approve, welcome, or keep clinging to feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness. As a result, relishing of consciousness
ceases. When that relishing ceases, grasping ceases. ... That is how
this entire mass of suffering ceases.

This is the ending of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.6 Retreat *Paṭisallāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, meditate in retreat. A mendicant in retreat truly
understands. What do they truly understand? The origin and ending of
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. ..."

**(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.7 Anxiety Because of Grasping *Upādāparitassanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you how grasping leads to anxiety, and how not
grasping leads to freedom from anxiety. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"And how does grasping lead to anxiety? It's when an unlearned ordinary
person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and
are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.
They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. But that form of theirs decays and perishes, and consciousness
latches on to the perishing of form. Anxieties occupy their mind, born
of latching on to the perishing of form, and originating in accordance
with natural principles. So they become frightened, worried, concerned,
and anxious because of grasping.

They regard feeling as self ...

They regard perception as self ...

They regard choices as self ...

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. But that consciousness
of theirs decays and perishes, and consciousness latches on to the
perishing of consciousness. Anxieties occupy their mind, born of
latching on to the perishing of consciousness, and originating in
accordance with natural principles. So they become frightened, worried,
concerned, and anxious because of grasping. That's how grasping leads to
anxiety.

And how does not grasping lead to freedom from anxiety? It's when a
learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. When that form of theirs decays and perishes, consciousness
doesn't latch on to the perishing of form. Anxieties---born of latching
on to the perishing of form and originating in accordance with natural
principles---don't occupy their mind. So they don't become frightened,
worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping.

They don't regard feeling as self ...

They don't regard perception as self ...

They don't regard choices as self ...

They don't regard consciousness as self ... When that consciousness of
theirs decays and perishes, consciousness doesn't latch on to the
perishing of consciousness. Anxieties---born of latching on to the
perishing of consciousness and originating in accordance with natural
principles---don't occupy their mind. So they don't become frightened,
worried, concerned, or anxious because of grasping. That's how not
grasping leads to freedom from anxiety."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.8 Anxiety Because of Grasping (2nd) *Dutiyaupādāparitassanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you how grasping leads to anxiety, and how not
grasping leads to freedom from anxiety. Listen and apply your mind well,
I will speak. And how does grasping lead to anxiety? It's when an
unlearned ordinary person regards form like this: 'This is mine, I am
this, this is my self.' But that form of theirs decays and perishes,
which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness like
this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self.' But that consciousness
of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress. That's how grasping leads to anxiety.

And how does not grasping lead to freedom from anxiety? It's when a
learned noble disciple regards form like this: 'This is not mine, I am
not this, this is not my self.' When that form of theirs decays and
perishes, it doesn't give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.' When that consciousness of theirs decays and perishes, it
doesn't give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
That's how not grasping leads to freedom from anxiety."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.9 Impermanence in the Three Times *Kālattayaaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past form,
doesn't look forward to enjoying future form, and they practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness of the past and future is impermanent, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past
consciousness, doesn't look forward to enjoying future consciousness,
and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding present consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.10 Suffering in the Three Times *Kālattayadukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form of the past and future is suffering, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past form,
doesn't look forward to enjoying future form, and they practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness of the past and future is suffering, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past
consciousness, doesn't look forward to enjoying future consciousness,
and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding present consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.11 Not-Self in the Three Times *Kālattayaanattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form of the past and future is not-self, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past form,
doesn't look forward to enjoying future form, and they practice for
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present form.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness of the past and future is not-self, let alone the present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about past
consciousness, doesn't look forward to enjoying future consciousness,
and they practice for the disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding present consciousness."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Impermanence

### SN 22.12 Impermanence *Aniccasutta*

So I have heard. At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
impermanent.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.13 Suffering *Dukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
suffering.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.14 Not-Self *Anattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
not-self.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.15 That Which is Impermanent *Yadaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Feeling is impermanent ...

Perception is impermanent ...

Choices are impermanent ...

Consciousness is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's
suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.16 That Which is Suffering *Yaṁdukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is suffering. What's suffering is not-self. And what's
not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Feeling is suffering ...

Perception is suffering ...

Choices are suffering ...

Consciousness is suffering. What's suffering is not-self. And what's
not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.17 That Which is Not-Self *Yadanattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Feeling is not-self ...

Perception is not-self ...

Choices are not-self ...

Consciousness is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.18 Impermanence With Its Cause *Sahetuaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. The cause and reason that gives rise
to form is also impermanent. Since form is produced by what is
impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Feeling is impermanent ...

Perception is impermanent ...

Choices are impermanent ...

Consciousness is impermanent. The cause and reason that gives rise to
consciousness is also impermanent. Since consciousness is produced by
what is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.19 Suffering With Its Cause *Sahetudukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is suffering. The cause and reason that gives rise to
form is also suffering. Since form is produced by what is suffering, how
could it be happiness?

Feeling is suffering ...

Perception is suffering ...

Choices are suffering ...

Consciousness is suffering. The cause and reason that gives rise to
consciousness is also suffering. Since consciousness is produced by what
is suffering, how could it be happiness?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.20 Not-Self With Its Cause *Sahetuanattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is not-self. The cause and reason that gives rise to
form is also not-self. Since form is produced by what is not-self, how
could it be self?

Feeling is not-self ...

Perception is not-self ...

Choices are not-self ...

Consciousness is not-self. The cause and reason that gives rise to
consciousness is also not-self. Since consciousness is produced by what
is not-self, how could it be self?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.21 With Ānanda *Ānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of 'cessation'. The cessation of what things does this
refer to?"

"Ānanda, form is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated,
liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease. Its cessation is what
'cessation' refers to.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent, conditioned, dependently originated,
liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease. Its cessation is what
'cessation' refers to.

When they speak of 'cessation', its the cessation of these things that
this refers to."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Burden

### SN 22.22 The Burden *Bhārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the burden, the bearer of the burden, the
picking up of the burden, and the putting down of the burden. Listen ...

And what is the burden? The five grasping aggregates, it should be said.
What five? The grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness. This is called the burden.

And who is the bearer of the burden? The person, it should be said; the
venerable of such and such name and clan. This is called the bearer of
the burden.

And what is the picking up of the burden? It's the craving that leads to
future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure
wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to
continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the
picking up of the burden.

And what is the putting down of the burden? It's the fading away and
cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it
away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. This is
called the putting down of the burden."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "The five aggregates are indeed burdens,\
> and the person is the bearer of the burden.\
> Picking up the burden is suffering in the world,\
> and putting the burden down is happiness.
>
> When the heavy burden is put down\
> without picking up another,\
> and having plucked out craving, root and all,\
> you're hungerless, quenched."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.23 Complete Understanding *Pariññasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that should be completely
understood, and complete understanding. Listen ...

And what things should be completely understood? Form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness. These are called the things that
should be completely understood.

And what is complete understanding? The ending of greed, hate, and
delusion. This is called complete understanding."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.24 Directly Knowing *Abhijānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding form,
without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end suffering.

Without directly knowing and completely understanding feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, without dispassion for it and
giving it up, you can't end suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding form, having dispassion
for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness, having dispassion for it and giving it
up, you can end suffering."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.25 Desire and Greed *Chandarāgasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, give up desire and greed for form. Thus that form will be
given up, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and
unable to arise in the future.

Give up desire and greed for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness. Thus that consciousness will be given up, cut off at the
root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the
future."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.26 Gratification *Assādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification, the
drawback, and the escape when it comes to form ... feeling ...
perception ... choices ... and consciousness?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from
form: this is its gratification. That form is impermanent, suffering,
and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and
greed for form: this is its escape. The pleasure and happiness that
arise from feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness: this is
its gratification. That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and
perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and
greed for consciousness: this is its escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand these five grasping aggregates'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I
didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I
announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.27 Gratification (2nd) *Dutiyaassādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I went in search of form's gratification, and I found it.
I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of form's gratification. I
went in search of form's drawback, and I found it. I've seen clearly
with wisdom the full extent of form's drawback. I went in search of
form's escape, and I found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full
extent of form's escape.

I went in search of the gratification of feeling ... perception ...
choices ... and consciousness, and I found it. I've seen clearly with
wisdom the full extent of consciousness's gratification. I went in
search of consciousness's drawback, and I found it. I've seen clearly
with wisdom the full extent of consciousness's drawback. I went in
search of consciousness's escape, and I found it. I've seen clearly with
wisdom the full extent of consciousness's escape.

As long as I didn't truly understand these five grasping aggregates'
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce
my supreme perfect awakening ... But when I did truly understand these
five grasping aggregates' gratification, drawback, and escape for what
they are, I announced my supreme perfect awakening ...

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.28 Gratification (3rd) *Tatiyaassādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in form, sentient beings
wouldn't be aroused by it. But since there is gratification in form,
sentient beings are aroused by it. If form had no drawback, sentient
beings wouldn't grow disillusioned with it. But since form has a
drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. If there were
no escape from form, sentient beings wouldn't escape from it. But since
there is an escape from form, sentient beings do escape from it.

If there were no gratification in feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, sentient beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But since
there is gratification in consciousness, sentient beings are aroused by
it. If consciousness had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow
disillusioned with it. But since consciousness has a drawback, sentient
beings do grow disillusioned with it. If there were no escape from
consciousness, sentient beings wouldn't escape from it. But since there
is an escape from consciousness, sentient beings do escape from it.

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand these five grasping
aggregates' gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they
haven't escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they don't live detached, liberated, with a mind free of
limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand these five grasping
aggregates' gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are,
they've escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.29 Taking Pleasure *Abhinandanasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if you take pleasure in form, you take pleasure in
suffering. If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you're not exempt
from suffering.

If you take pleasure in feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you take pleasure in suffering. If you take pleasure in
suffering, I say you're not exempt from suffering.

If you don't take pleasure in form, you don't take pleasure in
suffering. If you don't take pleasure in suffering, I say you're exempt
from suffering.

If you don't take pleasure in feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you don't take pleasure in suffering. If you don't take
pleasure in suffering, I say you're exempt from suffering."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.30 Arising *Uppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
form is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death.

The arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness is the arising of suffering,
the continuation of diseases, and the manifestation of old age and
death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of form is the cessation of
suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and
death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness is the cessation of suffering, the settling of
diseases, and the ending of old age and death."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.31 The Root of Misery *Aghamūlasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you misery and the root of misery. Listen ...

And what is misery? Form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are misery. This is called misery.

And what is the root of misery? It's the craving that leads to future
lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure wherever it
lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to continue
existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the root of
misery."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.32 The Breakable *Pabhaṅgusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the breakable and the unbreakable. Listen
...

And what is the breakable? What is the unbreakable? Form is breakable,
but its cessation, settling, and ending is unbreakable.

Feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness is breakable, but
its cessation, settling, and ending is unbreakable."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Not Yours

### SN 22.33 It's Not Yours *Natumhākasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours? Form isn't yours: give it
up. Giving it up will be for your welfare and happiness.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness.

Suppose a person was to carry off the grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves in this Jeta's Grove, or burn them, or do what they want with
them. Would you think: 'This person is carrying us off, burning us, or
doing what they want with us'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because to us that's neither self nor belonging
to self."

"In the same way, mendicants, form isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up
will be for your welfare and happiness.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.34 It's Not Yours (2nd) *Dutiyanatumhākasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours?

Form isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare and
happiness.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness.

Give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your welfare and
happiness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.35 A Mendicant *Aññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"Mendicant, you're defined by what you have an underlying tendency for.
You're not defined by what you have no underlying tendency for."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"If you have an underlying tendency for form, you're defined by that. If
you have an underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness, you're defined by that.

If you have no underlying tendency for form, you're not defined by that.
If you have no underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, you're not defined by that.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

If you have an underlying tendency for form, you're defined by that. If
you have an underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness, you're defined by that.

If you have no underlying tendency for form, you're not defined by that.
If you have no underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, you're not defined by that.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.36 A Mendicant (2nd) *Dutiyaaññatarabhikkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, you're measured against what you have an underlying tendency
for, and you're defined by what you're measured against. You're not
measured against what you have no underlying tendency for, and you're
not defined by what you're not measured against."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"If you have an underlying tendency for form, you're measured against
that, and you're defined by what you're measured against. If you have an
underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you're measured against that, and you're defined by what
you're measured against.

If you have no underlying tendency for form, you're not measured against
that, and you're not defined by what you're not measured against. If you
have no underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you're not measured against that, and you're not defined
by what you're not measured against.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

If you have an underlying tendency for form, you're measured against
that, and you're defined by what you're measured against. If you have an
underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you're measured against that, and you're defined by what
you're measured against.

If you have no underlying tendency for form, you're not measured against
that, and you're not defined by what you're not measured against. If you
have no underlying tendency for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, you're not measured against that, and you're not defined
by what you're not measured against.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.37 With Ānanda *Ānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

And then Venerable Ānanda ... sitting to one side, the Buddha said to
him:

"Ānanda, suppose they were to ask you: 'Reverend Ānanda, what are the
things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change
while persisting is evident?' How would you answer?"

"Sir, suppose they were to ask me: 'What are the things for which
arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while persisting is
evident?' I'd answer like this:

'Reverend, the arising of form is evident, its vanishing is evident, and
change while persisting is evident. The arising of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness is evident, its vanishing is
evident, and change while persisting is evident. These are the things
for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while
persisting is evident.'

That's how I'd answer such a question."

"Good, good, Ānanda. The arising of form is evident, its vanishing is
evident, and change while persisting is evident. The arising of feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness is evident, its vanishing
is evident, and change while persisting is evident. These are the things
for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and change while
persisting is evident.

That's how you should answer such a question."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.38 With Ānanda (2nd) *Dutiyaānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Sitting to one side, the Buddha said to Ānanda:

"Ānanda, suppose they were to ask you: 'Reverend Ānanda, what are the
things for which arising, vanishing, and change while persisting were
evident? What are the things for which arising, vanishing, and change
while persisting will be evident? What are the things for which arising,
vanishing, and change while persisting are evident?' How would you
answer?"

"Sir, suppose they were to ask me: 'Reverend Ānanda, what are the things
for which arising, vanishing, and change while persisting were evident?
What are the things for which arising, vanishing, and change while
persisting will be evident? What are the things for which arising,
vanishing, and change while persisting are evident?' I'd answer like
this:

'Whatever form has passed, ceased, and perished, its arising, vanishing,
and change while persisting were evident. Whatever feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness has passed, ceased, and
perished, its arising, vanishing, and change while persisting were
evident. These the things for which arising, vanishing, and change while
persisting were evident.

Whatever form is not yet born, and has not yet appeared, its arising,
vanishing, and change while persisting will be evident. Whatever feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness is not yet born, and has
not yet appeared, its arising, vanishing, and change while persisting
will be evident. These are the things for which arising, vanishing, and
change while persisting will be evident.

Whatever form has been born, and has appeared, its arising, vanishing,
and change while persisting is evident. Whatever feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness has been born, and has appeared, its
arising, vanishing, and change while persisting are evident. These are
the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and
change while persisting is evident.' That's how I'd answer such a
question."

"Good, good, Ānanda. Whatever form has passed, ceased, and perished, its
arising, vanishing, and change while persisting were evident. Whatever
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness has passed, ceased,
and perished, its arising, vanishing, and change while persisting were
evident. These the things for which arising, vanishing, and change while
persisting were evident.

Whatever form is not yet born, and has not yet appeared, its arising,
vanishing, and change while persisting will be evident. Whatever feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness is not yet born, and has
not yet appeared, its arising, vanishing, and change while persisting
will be evident. These are the things for which arising, vanishing, and
change while persisting will be evident.

Whatever form has been born, and has appeared, its arising, vanishing,
and change while persisting are evident. Whatever feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness has been born, and has appeared, its
arising, vanishing, and change while persisting are evident. These are
the things for which arising is evident, vanishing is evident, and
change while persisting is evident.

That's how you should answer such a question."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.39 In Line With the Teachings *Anudhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is practicing in line with the teachings,
this is what's in line with the teachings.

They should live full of disillusionment for form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness. Living in this way, they completely
understand form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.
Completely understanding form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness, they're freed from these things. They're freed from
rebirth, old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress. They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.40 In Line with the Teachings (2nd) *Dutiyaanudhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is practicing in line with the teachings,
this is what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing
impermanence in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.
... They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.41 In Line with the Teachings (3rd) *Tatiyaanudhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is practicing in line with the teachings,
this is what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing
suffering in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. ...
They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.42 In Line with the Teachings (4th) *Catutthaanudhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is practicing in line with the teachings,
this is what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing
not-self in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. ...

They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Be Your Own Island

### SN 22.43 Be Your Own Island *Attadīpasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, be your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge.
Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge.

When you live like this, you should examine the cause: 'From what are
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress born and produced?'

And, mendicants, from what are sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress born and produced? It's when an unlearned ordinary person has
not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the
teaching of the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are
neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
But that form of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.

They regard feeling as self ...

They regard perception as self ...

They regard choices as self ...

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. But that consciousness
of theirs decays and perishes, which gives rise to sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress.

Sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are given up when you
understand the impermanence of form---its perishing, fading away, and
cessation---and you truly see with right understanding that all form,
whether past or present, is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. When
these things are given up there's no anxiety. Without anxiety you live
happily. A mendicant who lives happily is said to be quenched in that
respect.

Sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress are given up when you
understand the impermanence of feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness---its perishing, fading away, and cessation---and you
truly see with right understanding that all consciousness, whether past
or present, is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. When these things
are given up there's no anxiety. Without anxiety you live happily. A
mendicant who lives happily is said to be quenched in that respect."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.44 Practice *Paṭipadāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that leads to the origin of
substantial reality and the practice that leads to the cessation of
substantial reality. Listen ...

And what is the practice that leads to the origin of substantial
reality? It's when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble
ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the true persons.

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form.

They regard feeling as self ...

They regard perception as self ...

They regard choices as self ...

They regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

This is called the practice that leads to the origin of substantial
reality. And that's why it's called a way of regarding things that leads
to the origin of suffering.

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial
reality? It's when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and
is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen
true persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true
persons.

They don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or
self in form.

They don't regard feeling as self ...

They don't regard perception as self ...

They don't regard choices as self ...

They don't regard consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial
reality. And that's why it's called a way of regarding things that leads
to the cessation of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.45 Impermanence *Aniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.' Seeing truly with right understanding like this,
the mind becomes dispassionate and freed from defilements by not
grasping.

Feeling is impermanent ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's
suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.' Seeing truly with right understanding like this, the mind
becomes dispassionate and freed from defilements by not grasping.

If a mendicant's mind is dispassionate towards the form element, the
feeling element, the perception element, the choices element, and the
consciousness element, it's freed from defilements by not grasping.

Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being content,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.46 Impermanence (2nd) *Dutiyaaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Feeling is impermanent ...

Perception is impermanent ...

Choices are impermanent ...

Consciousness is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's
suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

Seeing truly with right understanding like this, they have no theories
about the past. Not having theories about the past, they have no
theories about the future. Not having theories about the future, they
don't obstinately stick to them. Not misapprehending, the mind becomes
dispassionate towards form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness; it's freed from defilements by not grasping.

Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being content,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.47 Ways of Regarding *Samanupassanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins regard various kinds of
things as self, all regard the five grasping aggregates, or one of them.

What five? It's when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble
ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the true persons.

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness.

So they're not rid of this way of regarding things and the conceit 'I
am'. As long as they're not rid of the conceit 'I am', the five
faculties are conceived---the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. The
mind, ideas, and the element of ignorance are all present. Struck by
feelings born of contact with ignorance, an unlearned ordinary person
thinks 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will not be', 'I will have
form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be percipient', 'I will not be
percipient', 'I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient'.

The five faculties stay right where they are. But a learned noble
disciple gives up ignorance about them and gives rise to knowledge. With
the fading away of ignorance and the arising of knowledge, they don't
think 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will not be', 'I will have
form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be percipient', 'I will be
non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient nor non-percipient'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.48 Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the five aggregates and the five grasping
aggregates. Listen ...

And what are the five aggregates?

Any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is
called the aggregate of form.

Any kind of feeling at all ...

Any kind of perception at all ...

Any kind of choices at all ...

Any kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is
called the aggregate of consciousness.

These are called the five aggregates.

And what are the five grasping aggregates?

Any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is
accompanied by defilements and is prone to fuel grasping: this is called
the aggregate of form connected with grasping.

Any kind of feeling at all ...

Any kind of perception at all ...

Any kind of choices at all ...

Any kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, which is
accompanied by defilements and is prone to fuel grasping: this is called
the aggregate of consciousness connected with grasping.

These are called the five grasping aggregates."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.49 With Soṇa *Soṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

Then the householder Soṇa went up to the Buddha ... The
Buddha said to him:

"Soṇa, there are ascetics and brahmins who---based on form,
which is impermanent, suffering, and perishable---regard themselves
thus: 'I'm better', or 'I'm equal', or 'I'm worse'. What is that but a
failure to see truly? Based on feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, which is impermanent, suffering, and perishable, they
regard themselves thus: 'I'm better', or 'I'm equal', or 'I'm worse'.
What is that but a failure to see truly?

There are ascetics and brahmins who---based on form, which is
impermanent, suffering, and perishable---don't regard themselves thus:
'I'm better', or 'I'm equal', or 'I'm worse'. What is that but seeing
truly? Based on feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness,
which is impermanent, suffering, and perishable, they don't regard
themselves thus: 'I'm better', or 'I'm equal', or 'I'm worse'. What is
that but seeing truly?

What do you think, Soṇa? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So, Soṇa, you should truly see any kind of form at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle;
inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

You should truly see any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.50 With Soṇa (2nd) *Dutiyasoṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground.

Then the householder Soṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and
sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Soṇa, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand
form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation. They don't understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand form, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. They do
understand feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I
deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the
goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with
their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.51 The End of Relishing *Nandikkhayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form really is impermanent. A mendicant sees that it is
impermanent: that's their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow
disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends,
relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is freed, and is
said to be well freed.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness really is impermanent. A mendicant sees that it is
impermanent: that's their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow
disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends,
relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is freed, and is
said to be well freed."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.52 The End of Relishing (2nd) *Dutiyanandikkhayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, rationally apply the mind to form. Truly see the
impermanence of form. When a mendicant does this, they grow
disillusioned with form. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed
ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is freed,
and is said to be well freed.

Rationally apply the mind to feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness. Truly see the impermanence of consciousness. When a
mendicant does this, they grow disillusioned with consciousness. When
relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When
relishing and greed end, the mind is freed, and is said to be well
freed."

**the middle fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Involvement

### SN 22.53 Involvement *Upayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, if you're involved, you're not free. If you're not
involved, you're free.

As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form,
supported by form, founded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it
would grow, increase, and mature.

Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling ...

Or consciousness would remain involved with perception ...

Or as long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with
choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle
of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

Mendicants, suppose you say: 'Apart from form, feeling, perception, and
choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its
passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.' That
is not possible.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, the support is
cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element ...

perception element ...

choices element ...

consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no
foundation for consciousness. Since that consciousness does not become
established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed.

Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being content,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.54 Seeds *Bījasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are five kinds of plants propagated from seeds. What
five? Plants propagated from roots, stems, cuttings, or joints; and
those from regular seeds are the fifth.

Suppose these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds were intact,
unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. But there's no
soil or water. Then would these five kinds of plants propagated from
seeds reach growth, increase, and maturity?"

"No, sir."

"Suppose these five kinds of plants propagated from seeds were intact,
unspoiled, not weather-damaged, fertile, and well-kept. And there is
soil and water. Then would these five kinds of plants propagated from
seeds reach growth, increase, and maturity?"

"Yes, sir."

"The four grounds of consciousness should be seen as like the earth
element. Relishing and greed should be seen as like the water element.
Consciousness with its fuel should be seen as like the five kinds of
plants propagated from seeds.

As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form,
supported by form, grounded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing,
it would grow, increase, and mature.

Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling ...

Or consciousness would remain involved with perception ...

Or as long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with
choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle
of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.

Mendicants, suppose you say: 'Apart from form, feeling, perception, and
choices, I will describe the coming and going of consciousness, its
passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.' That
is not possible.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, the support is
cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element ...

perception element ...

choices element ...

consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no
foundation for consciousness. Since that consciousness does not become
established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed.

Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being content,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended ... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.55 An Inspired Saying *Udānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha expressed this heartfelt sentiment: "'It might not be,
and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.' A
mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the lower fetters."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha, "But sir, how
can a mendicant who makes such a resolution cut off the lower fetters?"

"Mendicant, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in their teaching. They've not
seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in their
teaching.

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness.

They don't truly understand form---which is impermanent---as
impermanent. They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness---which is impermanent---as impermanent.

They don't truly understand form---which is suffering---as suffering.
They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is suffering---as suffering.

They don't truly understand form---which is not-self---as not-self. They
don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is not-self---as not-self.

They don't truly understand form---which is conditioned---as
conditioned. They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness---which is conditioned---as conditioned.

They don't truly understand that form will disappear. They don't truly
understand that feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
will disappear.

But a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self ... They don't regard feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness as self.

They truly understand form---which is impermanent---as impermanent. They
truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is impermanent---as impermanent.

They truly understand form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is suffering---as suffering.

They truly understand form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is not-self---as not-self.

They truly understand form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is conditioned---as conditioned.

They truly understand that form will disappear. They truly understand
that feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness will
disappear.

It's because of the disappearance of form, feeling, perception, choices,
and consciousness that a mendicant who makes such a resolution---'It
might not be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not
be mine'---can cut off the lower fetters."

"Sir, a mendicant who makes such a resolution can cut off the lower
fetters.

But how are they to know and see in order to end the defilements in the
present life?"

"Mendicant, an unlearned ordinary person worries about things that
aren't a worry. For an unlearned ordinary person worries: 'It might not
be, and it might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.'

A learned noble disciple doesn't worry about things that aren't a worry.
For a learned noble disciple doesn't worry: 'It might not be, and it
might not be mine. It will not be, and it will not be mine.'

As long as consciousness remains, it would remain involved with form,
supported by form, founded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it
would grow, increase, and mature.

Or consciousness would remain involved with feeling ...

Or consciousness would remain involved with perception ...

Or consciousness would remain involved with choices, supported by
choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would
grow, increase, and mature.

Suppose, mendicant, you were to say: 'Apart from form, feeling,
perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of
consciousness, its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase,
and maturity.' That is not possible.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the form element, the support is
cut off, and there is no foundation for consciousness.

If a mendicant has given up greed for the feeling element ...

perception element ...

choices element ...

consciousness element, the support is cut off, and there is no
foundation for consciousness. Since that consciousness does not become
established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed.

Being free, it's stable. Being stable, it's content. Being content,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended ... there is nothing further for this
place.'

The ending of the defilements is for one who knows and sees this."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.56 Rounds of the Grasping Aggregates *Upādānaparipavattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? The
grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

As long as I didn't truly understand these five grasping aggregates in
four rounds, I didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these five grasping aggregates in four
rounds, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

And how are there four rounds? I directly knew form, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I directly knew
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

And what is form? The four principal states, and form derived from the
four principal states. This is called form. Form originates from food.
When food ceases, form ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation
of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion.

Whatever ascetics and brahmins have directly known form in this
way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation---and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding form: they are practicing well. Those who practice
well have a firm footing in this teaching and training.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this
way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation---and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding form, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed. Those
who are well freed are consummate ones. For consummate ones, there is no
cycle of rebirths to be found.

And what is feeling? There are these six classes of feeling: feeling
born of contact through the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. This
is called feeling. Feeling originates from contact. When contact ceases,
feeling ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is
simply this noble eightfold path ...

And what is perception? There are these six classes of perception:
perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. This
is called perception. Perception originates from contact. When contact
ceases, perception ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path ...

And what are choices? There are these six classes of intention:
intention regarding sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas.
These are called choices. Choices originate from contact. When contact
ceases, choices cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of
choices is simply this noble eightfold path ...

And what is consciousness? There are these six classes of consciousness:
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. This is called
consciousness. Consciousness originates from name and form. When name
and form cease, consciousness ceases. The practice that leads to the
cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

Whatever ascetics and brahmins have directly known consciousness in this
way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation---and are practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding consciousness: they are practicing well. Those who
practice well have a firm footing in this teaching and training.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in
this way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation---and due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding consciousness, are freed by not grasping: they are well freed.
Those who are well freed are consummate ones. For consummate ones, there
is no cycle of rebirths to be found."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.57 Seven Cases *Sattaṭṭhānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, in this teaching and training a mendicant who is skilled in
seven cases and who examines in three ways is called consummate,
accomplished, a supreme person.

And how is a mendicant skilled in seven cases? It's when a mendicant
understands form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads
to its cessation. They understand form's gratification, drawback, and
escape. They understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. They understand consciousness's gratification, drawback,
and escape.

And what is form? The four principal states, and form derived from the
four principal states. This is called form. Form originates from food.
When food ceases, form ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation
of form is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion.

The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its
gratification. That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this
is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this
is its escape.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this
way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation; its gratification, drawback, and escape---and are practicing
for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form: they are
practicing well. Those who practice well have a firm footing in this
teaching and training.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known form in this
way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation; its gratification, drawback, and escape---and due to
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding form, are freed by
not grasping: they are well freed. Those who are well freed are
consummate ones. For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to
be found.

And what is feeling? There are these six classes of feeling: feeling
born of eye contact ... feeling born of mind contact. This is called
feeling. Feeling originates from contact. When contact ceases, feeling
ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of feelings is simply
this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness,
and right immersion.

The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling: this is its
gratification. That feeling is impermanent, suffering, and perishable:
this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for
feeling: this is its escape. ...

And what is perception? There are these six classes of perception:
perceptions of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. This
is called perception. Perception originates from contact. When contact
ceases, perception ceases. The practice that leads to the cessation of
perceptions is simply this noble eightfold path ...

And what are choices? There are these six classes of intention:
intention regarding sights ... intention regarding ideas. These are
called choices. Choices originate from contact. When contact ceases,
choices cease. The practice that leads to the cessation of choices is
simply this noble eightfold path ...

And what is consciousness? There are these six classes of consciousness:
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind consciousness. This is called
consciousness. Consciousness originates from name and form. When name
and form cease, consciousness ceases. The practice that leads to the
cessation of consciousness is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

The pleasure and happiness that arise from consciousness: this is its
gratification. That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and
perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and
greed for consciousness: this is its escape.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in
this way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation; its gratification, drawback, and escape---and are
practicing for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
consciousness: they are practicing well. Those who practice well have a
firm footing in this teaching and training.

Those ascetics and brahmins who have directly known consciousness in
this way---and its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation; its gratification, drawback, and escape---and due to
disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness, are
freed by not grasping: they are well freed. Those who are well freed are
consummate ones. For consummate ones, there is no cycle of rebirths to
be found. That's how a mendicant is skilled in seven cases.

And how does a mendicant examine in three ways? It's when a mendicant
examines by way of the elements, sense fields, and dependent
origination. That's how a mendicant examines in three ways.

In this teaching and training, a mendicant who is skilled in seven cases
and who examines in three ways is called consummate, accomplished, a
supreme person."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.58 The Fully Awakened Buddha *Sammāsambuddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha is
freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding form. They're called a fully awakened Buddha. A mendicant
freed by wisdom is also freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment,
dispassion, and cessation regarding form. They're called a mendicant
freed by wisdom.

A Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened Buddha is freed by not
grasping, due to disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness. They're called a fully awakened Buddha. A mendicant freed
by wisdom is also freed by not grasping, due to disillusionment,
dispassion, and cessation regarding consciousness. They're called a
mendicant freed by wisdom.

What, then, is the difference between a Realized One, a perfected one, a
fully awakened Buddha, and a mendicant freed by wisdom?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"The Realized One, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha gave
rise to the unarisen path, gave birth to the unborn path, and explained
the unexplained path. He is the knower of the path, the discoverer of
the path, the expert on the path. And now the disciples live following
the path; they acquire it later.

This is the difference between a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully
awakened Buddha, and a mendicant freed by wisdom."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.59 The Characteristic of Not-Self *Anattalakkhaṇasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Varanasi, in the deer park at
Isipatana. There the Buddha addressed the group of five mendicants:

"Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, form is not-self. For if form were self, it wouldn't lead
to affliction. And you could compel form: 'May my form be like this! May
it not be like that!' But because form is not-self, it leads to
affliction. And you can't compel form: 'May my form be like this! May it
not be like that!'

Feeling is not-self ...

Perception is not-self ...

Choices are not-self ...

Consciousness is not-self. For if consciousness were self, it wouldn't
lead to affliction. And you could compel consciousness: 'May my
consciousness be like this! May it not be like that!' But because
consciousness is not-self, it leads to affliction. And you can't compel
consciousness: 'May my consciousness be like this! May it not be like
that!'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling permanent or impermanent?" ...

"Is perception permanent or impermanent?" ...

"Are choices permanent or impermanent?" ...

"Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.'

Any kind of feeling at all ...

Any kind of perception at all ...

Any kind of choices at all ...

You should truly see any kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the group of five mendicants
approved what the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being
spoken, the minds of the group of five mendicants were freed from
defilements by not grasping.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.60 With Mahāli *Mahālisutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked
roof.

Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha ... and said
to him:

"Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this: 'There is no cause or
reason for the corruption of sentient beings. Sentient beings are
corrupted without cause or reason. There's no cause or reason for the
purification of sentient beings. Sentient beings are purified without
cause or reason.' What does the Buddha say about this?"

"Mahāli, there is a cause and reason for the corruption of
sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.
There is a cause and reason for the purification of sentient beings.
Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason."

"But sir, what is the cause and reason for the corruption of sentient
beings? How are sentient beings corrupted with cause and reason?"

"Mahāli, if form were exclusively painful---soaked and
steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings wouldn't
be aroused by it. But because form is pleasurable---soaked and steeped
in pleasure and not steeped in pain---sentient beings are aroused by it.
Since they are aroused by it, they're caught up in it, and so they
become corrupted. This is a cause and reason for the corruption of
sentient beings. This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause
and reason.

If feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness were exclusively painful---soaked and steeped in pain and
not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But
because consciousness is pleasurable---soaked and steeped in pleasure
and not steeped in pain---sentient beings are aroused by it. Since they
are aroused by it, they're caught up in it, and so they become
corrupted. This is a cause and reason for the corruption of sentient
beings. This is how sentient beings are corrupted with cause and
reason."

"But sir, what is the cause and reason for the purification of sentient
beings? How are sentient beings purified with cause and reason?"

"Mahāli, if form was perfectly pleasurable---soaked and
steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain---sentient beings wouldn't
grow disillusioned with it. But because form is painful---soaked and
steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings do grow
disillusioned with it. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When
desire fades away they are purified. This is a cause and reason for the
purification of sentient beings. This is how sentient beings are
purified with cause and reason.

If feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness was perfectly pleasurable---soaked and steeped in pleasure
and not steeped in pain---sentient beings wouldn't grow disillusioned
with it. But because consciousness is painful---soaked and steeped in
pain and not steeped in pleasure---sentient beings do grow disillusioned
with it. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away
they are purified. This is a cause and reason for the purification of
sentient beings. This is how sentient beings are purified with cause and
reason."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.61 Burning *Ādittasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
burning.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.62 The Scope of Language *Niruttipathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these three scopes of terminology, labeling, and
description. They're uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning.
They're not being corrupted now, nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and
brahmins don't look down on them. What three? When form has passed,
ceased, and perished, its designation, label, and description is 'was'.
It's not 'is' or 'will be'.

When feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness has passed, ceased, and perished, its designation, label,
and description is 'was'. It's not 'is' or 'will be'.

When form is not yet born, and has not yet appeared, its designation,
label, and description is 'will be'. It's not 'is' or 'was'.

When feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness is not yet born, and has not yet appeared, its
designation, label, and description is 'will be'. It's not 'is' or
'was'.

When form has been born, and has appeared, its designation, label, and
description is 'is'. It's not 'was' or 'will be'.

When feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness has been born, and has appeared, its designation, label,
and description is 'is'. It's not 'was' or 'will be'.

These are the three scopes of terminology, labeling, and description.
They're uncorrupted, as they have been since the beginning. They're not
being corrupted now, nor will they be. Sensible ascetics and brahmins
don't look down on them.

Even those wanderers of the past, Vassa and Bhañña of
Ukkalā, who adhered to the doctrines of no-cause, inaction,
and nihilism, didn't imagine that these three scopes of language should
be criticized or rejected. Why is that? For fear of blame, attack, and
condemnation."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Perfected Ones

### SN 22.63 When You Grasp *Upādiyamānasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"When you grasp, mendicant, you're bound by Māra. Not
grasping, you're free from the Wicked One."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, when you grasp form you're bound by Māra. Not
grasping, you're free from the Wicked One. When you grasp feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, you're bound by
Māra. Not grasping, you're free from the Wicked One.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

When you grasp form you're bound by Māra. Not grasping,
you're free from the Wicked One. When you grasp feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness, you're bound by Māra. Not
grasping, you're free from the Wicked One.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."

And then that mendicant approved and agreed with what the Buddha said.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then that mendicant, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.64 Conceiving *Maññamānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"When you conceive, mendicant, you're bound by Māra. Not
conceiving, you're free from the Wicked One."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, when you conceive form you're bound by Māra. Not
conceiving, you're free from the Wicked One. When you conceive feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness, you're bound by
Māra. Not conceiving, you're free from the Wicked One.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

When you conceive form you're bound by Māra. Not
conceiving, you're free from the Wicked One. When you conceive feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness, you're bound by
Māra. Not conceiving, you're free from the Wicked One.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.65 When You Take Pleasure *Abhinandamānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"When you take pleasure, mendicant, you're bound by Māra.
Not taking pleasure, you're free from the Wicked One."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, when you take pleasure in form you're bound by Māra.
Not taking pleasure, you're free from the Wicked One. When you take
pleasure in feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness you're
bound by Māra. Not taking pleasure, you're free from the
Wicked One.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

When you take pleasure in form you're bound by Māra. Not
taking pleasure, you're free from the Wicked One. When you take pleasure
in feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness you're bound by
Māra. Not taking pleasure, you're free from the Wicked One.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.66 Impermanence *Aniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, give up desire for anything that's impermanent."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, form is impermanent; I should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent; I should give up desire for it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

Form is impermanent; you should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent; you should give up desire for it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.67 Suffering *Dukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, give up desire for anything that's suffering."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, form is suffering; I should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is suffering; I should give up desire for it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

Form is suffering; you should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is suffering; you should give up desire for it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.68 Not-Self *Anattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, give up desire for what is not-self."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, form is not-self; I should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is not-self; I should give up desire for it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

Form is not-self; you should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is not-self; you should give up desire for it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.69 Not Belonging to Self *Anattaniyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, give up desire for anything that doesn't belong to self."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, form doesn't belong to self; I should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness doesn't belong to self; I should give up desire for it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

Form doesn't belong to self; you should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness doesn't belong to self; you should give up desire for it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.70 Definitely Arousing *Rajanīyasaṇṭhitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, may the
Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard it, I'll live
alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Mendicant, give up desire for anything that's stuck in what's
arousing."

"Understood, Blessed One! Understood, Holy One!"

"But how do you see the detailed meaning of my brief statement?"

"Sir, form is stuck in what's arousing; I should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is stuck in what's arousing; I should give up desire for
it.

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand the detailed
meaning of what I've said in brief like this.

Form is stuck in what's arousing; you should give up desire for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is stuck in what's arousing; you should give up desire for
it.

This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in brief."
...

And that mendicant became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.71 With Rādha *Rādhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Rādha went up to the Buddha ... and asked
him, "Sir, how does one know and see so that there's no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body
and all external stimuli?"

"Rādha, one truly sees any kind of form at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

One truly sees any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

That's how to know and see so that there's no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli." ...

And Venerable Rādha became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.72 With Surādha *Surādhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Surādha said to the Buddha:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed?"

"Surādha, one is freed by not grasping having truly seen
any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self.'

One is freed by not grasping having truly seen any kind of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

That's how to know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed."
...

And Venerable Surādha became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Itchy

### SN 22.73 Gratification *Assādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. A learned noble
disciple does truly understand the gratification, the drawback, and the
escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.74 Origin *Samudayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when
it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. A
learned noble disciple does truly understand the origin, the ending, the
gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.75 Origin (2nd) *Dutiyasamudayasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, a learned noble disciple truly understands the origin, the
ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.76 The Perfected Ones *Arahantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's
suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' As far as there are abodes of sentient beings, even up
until the pinnacle of existence, the perfected ones are the foremost and
the best."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Oh! How happy are the perfected ones!\
> Craving is not found in them,\
> the conceit 'I am' is cut off,\
> and the net of delusion is shattered.
>
> They've attained imperturbability,\
> their minds are unclouded,\
> nothing in the world clings to them,\
> manifesting divinity, undefiled.
>
> Completely understanding the five aggregates,\
> their domain is the seven good qualities.\
> Those true persons are praiseworthy,\
> the Buddha's true-born sons.
>
> Endowed with the seven gems,\
> and trained in the three trainings,\
> the great heroes live on,\
> with fear and dread given up.
>
> Endowed with ten factors,\
> those giants have immersion.\
> These are the best in the world,\
> craving is not found in them.
>
> The adept's knowledge has arisen:\
> 'This bag of bones is my last.'\
> They are independent of others\
> in the core of the spiritual path.
>
> Unwavering in the face of discrimination,\
> they're freed from future lives.\
> They've reached the level of the tamed,\
> in the world, they're the winners.
>
> Above, below, all round,\
> relishing is not found in them.\
> They roar their lion's roar:\
> 'The awakened are supreme in the world!'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.77 The Perfected Ones (2nd) *Dutiyaarahantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

As far as there are abodes of sentient beings, even up until the
pinnacle of existence, the perfected ones are the foremost and the
best."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.78 The Lion *Sīhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, towards evening the lion, king of beasts, emerges from his
den, yawns, looks all around the four quarters, and roars his lion's
roar three times. Then he sets out on the hunt. And whatever animals
hear the roar of the lion, king of beasts, are typically filled with
fear, awe, and terror. They return to their lairs, be they in a hole,
the water, or a wood; and the birds take to the air. Even the royal
elephants, bound with strong harness in the villages, towns, and capital
cities, break apart their bonds, and urinate and defecate in terror as
they flee here and there. That's how powerful is the lion, king of
beasts, over animals, how illustrious and mighty.

In the same way, when a Realized One arises in the world---perfected, a
fully awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy,
knower of the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher
of gods and humans, awakened, blessed---he teaches the Dhamma: 'Such is
form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is
feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ... Such is
consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the ending
of consciousness.'

Now, there are gods who are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy,
living for ages in their divine palaces. When they hear this teaching by
the Realized One, they're typically filled with fear, awe, and terror.
'Oh no! It turns out we're impermanent, though we thought we were
permanent! It turns out we don't last, though we thought we were
everlasting! It turns out we're short-lived, though we thought we were
eternal! It turns out that we're impermanent, not lasting, short-lived,
and included within substantial reality.' That's how powerful is the
Realized One in the world with its gods, how illustrious and mighty."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "The Buddha, the teacher without a peer\
> in all the world with its gods,\
> rolls forth the Wheel of Dhamma\
> from his own insight:
>
> substantial reality, its cessation,\
> the origin of substantial reality,\
> and the noble eightfold path\
> that leads to the stilling of suffering.
>
> And then the long-lived gods,\
> so beautiful and glorious,\
> are afraid and full of terror,\
> like the other beasts when they hear a lion.
>
> 'We haven't transcended substantial reality!\
> It turns out we're impermanent!'\
> So they say when they hear the word\
> of the perfected one, free and unaffected."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.79 Itchy *Khajjanīyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, whatever ascetics and brahmins recollect many kinds of past
lives, all recollect the five grasping aggregates, or one of them. What
five? 'I had such form in the past.' Recollecting thus, it's only form
that they recollect. 'I had such feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness in the past.' Recollecting thus, it's only consciousness
that they recollect.

And why do you call it form? It's deformed; that's why it's called
'form'. Deformed by what? Deformed by cold, heat, hunger, and thirst,
and deformed by the touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, and reptiles.
It's deformed; that's why it's called 'form'.

And why do you call it feeling? It feels; that's why it's called
'feeling'. And what does it feel? It feels pleasure, pain, and neutral.
It feels; that's why it's called 'feeling'.

And why do you call it perception? It perceives; that's why it's called
'perception'. And what does it perceive? It perceives blue, yellow, red,
and white. It perceives; that's why it's called 'perception'.

And why do you call them choices? Choices produce conditioned phenomena;
that's why they're called 'choices'. And what are the conditioned
phenomena that they produce? Form is a conditioned phenomenon; choices
are what make it into form. Feeling is a conditioned phenomenon; choices
are what make it into feeling. Perception is a conditioned phenomenon;
choices are what make it into perception. Choices are conditioned
phenomena; choices are what make them into choices. Consciousness is a
conditioned phenomenon; choices are what make it into consciousness.
Choices produce conditioned phenomena; that's why they're called
'choices'.

And why do you call it consciousness? It cognizes; that's why it's
called 'consciousness'. And what does it cognize? It cognizes sour,
bitter, pungent, sweet, hot, mild, salty, and bland. It cognizes; that's
why it's called 'consciousness'.

A learned noble disciple reflects on this: 'Currently I'm itched by
form. In the past I was also itched by form just like now. If I were to
look forward to enjoying form in the future, I'd be itched by form in
the future just as I am today.' Reflecting like this they don't worry
about past form, they don't look forward to enjoying future form, and
they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
present form.

'Currently I'm itched by feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness. In the past I was also itched by consciousness just like
now. If I were to look forward to enjoying consciousness in the future,
I'd be itched by consciousness in the future just as I am today.'
Reflecting like this they don't worry about past consciousness, they
don't look forward to enjoying future consciousness, and they practice
for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding present
consciousness.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' You should truly see any kind of
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

This is called a noble disciple who gets rid of things and doesn't
accumulate them; who gives things up and doesn't grasp at them; who
discards things and doesn't amass them; who dissipates things and
doesn't get clouded by them.

And what things do they get rid of and not accumulate? They get rid of
form and don't accumulate it. They get rid of feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness and don't accumulate it.

And what things do they give up and not grasp? They give up form and
don't grasp it. They give up feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness and don't grasp it.

And what things do they discard and not amass? They discard form and
don't amass it. They discard feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness and don't amass it.

And what things do they dissipate and not get clouded by? They dissipate
form and don't get clouded by it. They dissipate feeling ... perception
... choices ... consciousness and don't get clouded by it.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is called a mendicant who neither gets rid of things nor
accumulates them, but remains after getting rid of them. They neither
give things up nor grasp them, but remain after giving them up. They
neither discard things nor amass them, but remain after discarding them.
They neither dissipate things nor get clouded by them, but remain after
dissipating them.

And what things do they neither get rid of nor accumulate, but remain
after getting rid of them? They neither get rid of nor accumulate form,
but remain after getting rid of it. They neither get rid of nor
accumulate feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, but
remain after getting rid of it.

And what things do they neither give up nor grasp, but remain after
giving them up? They neither give up nor grasp form, but remain after
giving it up. They neither give up nor grasp feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, but remain after giving it up.

And what things do they neither discard nor amass, but remain after
discarding them? They neither discard nor amass form, but remain after
discarding it. They neither discard nor amass feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, but remain after discarding it.

And what things do they neither dissipate nor get clouded by, but remain
after dissipating them? They neither dissipate nor get clouded by form,
but remain after dissipating it. They neither dissipate nor get clouded
by feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, but remain
after dissipating it.

When a mendicant's mind is freed like this, the gods together with
Indra, the Divinity, and the Progenitor worship them from afar:

> 'Homage to you, O thoroughbred!\
> Homage to you, supreme among men!\
> We don't understand\
> the basis of your absorption.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.80 Beggars *Piṇḍolyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery.

Then the Buddha, having dismissed the mendicant Saṅgha for
some reason, robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kapilavatthu for alms. He wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu.
After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Great Wood
for the day's meditation, plunged deep into it, and sat at the root of a
young wood-apple tree to meditate.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "I've
sent the mendicant Saṅgha away. But there are mendicants
here who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this teaching
and training. Not seeing me they may change and fall apart. If a young
calf doesn't see its mother it may change and fall apart. ... Or if
young seedlings don't get water they may change and fall apart. In the
same way, there are mendicants here who are junior, recently gone forth,
newly come to this teaching and training. Not seeing me they may change
and fall apart. Why don't I support the mendicant Saṅgha
now as I did in the past?"

Then the divinity Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily
as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from
the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha. He arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said: "That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! The
Buddha has sent the mendicant Saṅgha away. But there are
mendicants who are junior, recently gone forth, newly come to this
teaching and training. ... May the Buddha be happy with the mendicant
Saṅgha! May the Buddha welcome the mendicant
Saṅgha! May the Buddha support the mendicant
Saṅgha now as he did in the past!"

The Buddha consented with silence. Then the divinity Sahampati, knowing
that the Buddha had consented, bowed, and respectfully circled the
Buddha, keeping him on his right, before vanishing right there.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
the Banyan Tree Monastery, where he sat on the seat spread out. Then he
used his psychic power to will that the mendicants would come to him
timidly, alone or in pairs. Those mendicants approached the Buddha
timidly, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them:

"This is the last of lifestyles, mendicants, namely relying on alms. The
world curses you: 'You beggar, walking bowl in hand!' Yet earnest
gentlemen take it up for a good reason. Not to escape a summons by a
king or a summons for a bandit, or because you were in debt or in fear,
or in order to make a living. But because they're swamped by rebirth,
old age, and death; by sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
They're swamped by suffering, mired in suffering. And they think,
'Hopefully I can find an end to this entire mass of suffering.'

That's how this gentleman has gone forth. Yet they covet sensual
pleasures; they're infatuated, full of ill will and malicious intent.
They are unmindful, lacking situational awareness and immersion, with
straying mind and undisciplined faculties. Suppose there was a firebrand
for lighting a funeral pyre, burning at both ends, and smeared with dung
in the middle. It couldn't be used as timber either in the village or
the wilderness. I say that person is just like this. They've missed out
on the pleasures of the lay life, and haven't fulfilled the goal of the
ascetic life.

There are these three unskillful thoughts. Sensual, malicious, and cruel
thoughts. And where do these three unskillful thoughts cease without
anything left over? In those who meditate with their mind firmly
established in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation; or who develop
signless immersion. This is quite enough motivation to develop signless
immersion. When signless immersion is developed and cultivated it is
very fruitful and beneficial.

There are these two views. Views favoring continued existence and views
favoring ending existence. A learned noble disciple reflects on this:
'Is there anything in the world that I could grasp without fault?' They
understand: 'There's nothing in the world that I could grasp without
fault. For in grasping I would grasp only at form, feeling, perception,
choices, or consciousness. That grasping of mine would be a condition
for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress to come to be. That is how this entire mass of
suffering originates.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?" ...

"So you should truly see ...

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.81 At Pārileyya *Pālileyyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery.

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
entered Kosambī for alms. After the meal, on his return
from almsround, he set his lodgings in order himself. Taking his bowl
and robe, without informing his attendants or taking leave of the
mendicant Saṅgha, he set out to go wandering alone, with no
companion.

Then, not long after the Buddha had left, one of the mendicants went to
Venerable Ānanda and told him what had happened. Ānanda said, "Reverend,
when the Buddha leaves like this it means he wants to stay alone. At
this time no-one should follow him."

Then the Buddha, traveling stage by stage, arrived at
Pārileyya, where he stayed at the root of a sacred sal
tree. Then several mendicants went up to Venerable Ānanda and exchanged
greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side and said to him, "Reverend, it's been a long time since we've
heard a Dhamma talk from the Buddha. We wish to hear a Dhamma talk from
the Buddha."

Then Venerable Ānanda together with those mendicants went to
Pārileyya to see the Buddha. They bowed and sat down to one
side, and the Buddha educated, encouraged, fired up, and inspired them
with a Dhamma talk.

Now at that time one of the monks had the thought, "How do you know and
see in order to end the defilements in the present life?"

Then the Buddha, knowing that monk's train of thought, addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, I've taught the Dhamma analytically. I've analytically
taught the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts,
the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers,
the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path. That's how
I've taught the Dhamma analytically. Though I've taught the Dhamma
analytically, still a certain mendicant present here has this thought:
'How do you know and see in order to end the defilements in the present
life?'

And how, mendicants, do you know and see in order to end the defilements
in the present life? Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen
the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of
the noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled
nor trained in the teaching of the true persons.

They regard form as self. But that regarding is just a conditioned
phenomenon. And what's the source, origin, birthplace, and inception of
that conditioned phenomenon? When an unlearned ordinary person is struck
by feelings born of contact with ignorance, craving arises. That
conditioned phenomenon is born from that. So that conditioned phenomenon
is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated. And that
craving, that feeling, that contact, and that ignorance are also
impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated. That's how you
should know and see in order to end the defilements in the present life.

Perhaps they don't regard form as self, but they still regard self as
possessing form. But that regarding is just a conditioned phenomenon.
...

Perhaps they don't regard form as self, or self as possessing form, but
they still regard form in self. But that regarding is just a conditioned
phenomenon. ...

Perhaps they don't regard form as self, or self as possessing form, or
form in self, but they still regard self in form. But that regarding is
just a conditioned phenomenon. ...

Perhaps they don't regard form as self, or self as possessing form, or
form in self, or self in form. But they regard feeling as self ...
perception as self ... choices as self ... consciousness as self ... But
that regarding is just a conditioned phenomenon. And what's the source
of that conditioned phenomenon? When an unlearned ordinary person is
struck by feelings born of contact with ignorance, craving arises. That
conditioned phenomenon is born from that. So that conditioned phenomenon
is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated. And that
craving, that feeling, that contact, and that ignorance are also
impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated. That's how you
should know and see in order to end the defilements in the present life.

Perhaps they don't regard form or feeling or perception or choices or
consciousness as self. Still, they have such a view: 'The self and the
cosmos are one and the same. After death I will be that, permanent,
everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.' But that eternalist view is
just a conditioned phenomenon. And what's the source of that conditioned
phenomenon? ... That's how you should know and see in order to end the
defilements in the present life.

Perhaps they don't regard form or feeling or perception or choices or
consciousness as self. Nor do they have such a view: 'The self and the
cosmos are one and the same. After death I will be that, permanent,
everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.' Still, they have such a view:
'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will not be, and it will
not be mine.' But that annihilationist view is just a conditioned
phenomenon. And what's the source of that conditioned phenomenon? ...
That's how you should know and see in order to end the defilements in
the present life.

Perhaps they don't regard form or feeling or perception or choices or
consciousness as self. Nor do they have such a view: 'The self and the
cosmos are one and the same. After death I will be that, permanent,
everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.' Nor do they have such a view:
'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will not be, and it will
not be mine.' Still, they have doubts and uncertainties. They're
undecided about the true teaching. That doubt and uncertainty, the
indecision about the true teaching, is just a conditioned phenomenon.
And what's the source of that conditioned phenomenon? When an unlearned
ordinary person is struck by feelings born of contact with ignorance,
craving arises. That conditioned phenomenon is born from that. So that
conditioned phenomenon is impermanent, conditioned, and dependently
originated. And that craving, that feeling, that contact, and that
ignorance are also impermanent, conditioned, and dependently originated.
That's how you should know and see in order to end the defilements in
the present life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.82 A Full Moon Night *Puṇṇamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the
stilt longhouse of Migāra's mother in the Eastern
Monastery, together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants. Now,
at that time it was the sabbath---the full moon on the fifteenth
day---and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the
Saṅgha of monks.

Then one of the mendicants got up from their seat, arranged their robe
over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and
said:

"Sir, I'd like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you'd take
the time to answer."

"Well then, mendicant, take your own seat and ask what you wish."

"Yes, sir," replied that mendicant. He took his seat and said to the
Buddha:

"Sir, are these the five grasping aggregates, that is: form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness?"

"Yes, they are," replied the Buddha.

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"But sir, what is the root of these five grasping aggregates?"

"These five grasping aggregates are rooted in desire." ... "But sir, is
that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping aggregates? Or
is grasping one thing and the five grasping aggregates another?"

"Neither. Rather, the desire and greed for them is the grasping there."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant asked another question:

"But sir, can there be different kinds of desire and greed for the five
grasping aggregates?"

"There can," said the Buddha.

"It's when someone thinks: 'In the future, may I be of such form, such
feeling, such perception, such choices, or such consciousness!' That's
how there can be different kinds of desire and greed for the five
grasping aggregates."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant asked another question:

"Sir, what is the scope of the term 'aggregates' as applied to the
aggregates?"

"Any kind of form at all---past, future, or present; internal or
external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is
called the aggregate of form. Any kind of feeling at all ... Any kind of
perception at all ... Any kind of choices at all ... Any kind of
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the
aggregate of consciousness. That's the scope of the term 'aggregates' as
applied to the aggregates."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant asked another question:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is
found? What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness is found?"

"The four principal states are the reason why the aggregate of form is
found. Contact is the reason why the aggregates of feeling, perception,
and choices are found. Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate
of consciousness is found."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant asked another question:

"Sir, how does substantialist view come about?"

"It's when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and
is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
the teaching of the true persons. They regard form as self, self as
having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness as self, self as having
consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's
how substantialist view comes about."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant ... asked another question:

"But sir, how does substantialist view not come about?"

"It's when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is
skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true
persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true
persons. They don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in
self, or self in form. They don't regard feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness as self, self as having consciousness,
consciousness in self, or self in consciousness. That's how
substantialist view does not come about."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant ... asked another question:

"Sir, what's the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it
comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?"

"The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its
gratification. That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this
is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for form: this
is its escape. The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness: this is its gratification.
That consciousness is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is
its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and greed for consciousness:
this is its escape."

Saying "Good, sir", that mendicant approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. Then he asked another question:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that there's no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body
and all external stimuli?"

"One truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or present;
internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or
near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' They truly see any kind of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near, *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' That's how to know and
see so that there's no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to
conceit for this conscious body and all external stimuli."

Now at that time one of the mendicants had the thought:

"So it seems, good fellow, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness are not-self. Then what self will the deeds done by
not-self affect?"

Then the Buddha, knowing that monk's train of thought, addressed the
mendicants:

"It's possible that some futile person here---unknowing and ignorant,
their mind dominated by craving---thinks they can overstep the teacher's
instructions. They think: 'So it seems, good fellow, that form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness are not-self. Then what self will
the deeds done by not-self affect?' Now, mendicants, you have been
educated by me in questioning with regards to all these things in all
such cases.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'"

> "Two on the aggregates; exactly the same;\
> － and can there be;\
> on the term; and on the cause;\
> two questions on substantial reality;\
> gratification; and that with consciousness:\
> these are the ten questions\
> the mendicant came to ask."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Senior Mendicants

### SN 22.83 With Ānanda *Ānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There Ānanda addressed the mendicants: "Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, the venerable named Puṇṇa son of
Mantāṇī was very helpful to me when I was just ordained. He
gave me this advice: 'Reverend Ānanda, the thought "I am" occurs because
of grasping, not by not grasping. Grasping what? The thought "I am"
occurs because of grasping form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness, not by not grasping.

Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of
adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror
or a clear bowl of water. They'd look because of grasping, not by not
grasping. In the same way, the thought "I am" occurs because of grasping
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness, not by not
grasping.

What do you think, Reverend Ānanda? Is form permanent or impermanent?'

'Impermanent, reverend.'

'Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?'

'Impermanent, reverend.' ...

'So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: "... there
is nothing further for this place."'

Reverends, the venerable named Puṇṇa son of
Mantāṇī was very helpful to me when I was just ordained. He
gave me this advice. And now that I've heard this teaching from
Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī, I've
comprehended the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.84 With Tissa *Tissasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Now at that time Venerable Tissa, the Buddha's paternal cousin, informed
several mendicants:

"Reverends, my body feels like it's drugged. I'm disorientated, the
teachings don't spring to mind, and dullness and drowsiness fill my
mind. I lead the spiritual life dissatisfied, and have doubts about the
teachings."

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened.

So the Buddha addressed one of the monks, "Please, monk, in my name tell
the mendicant Tissa that the Teacher summons him."

"Yes, sir," that monk replied. He went to Tissa and said to him,
"Reverend Tissa, the teacher summons you."

"Yes, reverend," Tissa replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat
down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"Is it really true, Tissa, that you informed several mendicants that
your body feels like it's drugged ... and you have doubts about the
teachings?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, Tissa? If you're not rid of greed, desire, fondness,
thirst, passion, and craving for form, when that form decays and
perishes, will it give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, good, Tissa! That's how it is, Tissa, when you're not rid of
greed for form.

If you're not rid of greed for feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, when that consciousness decays and perishes, will it give
rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, good, Tissa! That's how it is, Tissa, when you're not rid of
greed for consciousness.

What do you think, Tissa? If you are rid of greed, desire, fondness,
thirst, passion, and craving for form, when that form decays and
perishes, will it give rise to sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
distress?"

"No, sir."

"Good, good, Tissa! That's how it is, Tissa, when you are rid of greed
for form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness.

What do you think, Tissa? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'

Suppose, Tissa, there were two people. One was not skilled in the path,
the other was. The one not skilled in the path would question the one
skilled in the path, who would reply: 'Come, good man, this is the path.
Go down it an hour, and you'll see a fork in the road. Ignore the left,
and take the right-hand path. Go an hour more, and you'll see a dense
forest grove. Go an hour more, and you'll see an expanse of low-lying
marshes. Go an hour more, and you'll see a large, steep cliff. Go an
hour more, and you'll see level, cleared parkland.'

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is what it means.

'A person who is not skilled in the path' is a term for an ordinary
unlearned person.

'A person who is skilled in the path' is a term for the Realized One,
the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha.

'A fork in the road' is a term for doubt.

'The left-hand path' is a term for the wrong eightfold path, that is,
wrong view ... wrong immersion.

'The right-hand path' is a term for the noble eightfold path, that is,
right view ... right immersion.

'A dense forest grove' is a term for ignorance.

'An expanse of low-lying marshes' is a term for sensual pleasures.

'A large, steep cliff' is a term for anger and distress.

'Level, cleared parkland' is a term for extinguishment.

Rejoice, Tissa, rejoice! I'm here to advise you, to support you, and to
teach you."

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Tissa approved what
the Buddha said.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.85 With Yamaka *Yamakasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery.

Now at that time a mendicant called Yamaka had the following harmful
misconception: "As I understand the Buddha's teaching, a mendicant who
has ended the defilements is annihilated and destroyed when their body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death."

Several mendicants heard about this. They went to Yamaka and exchanged
greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side and said to him, "Is it really true, Reverend Yamaka, that you
have such a harmful misconception: 'As I understand the Buddha's
teaching, a mendicant who has ended the defilements is annihilated and
destroyed when their body breaks up, and doesn't exist after death'?"

"Yes, reverends, that's how I understand the Buddha's teaching."

"Don't say that, Yamaka! Don't misrepresent the Buddha, for
misrepresentation of the Buddha is not good. And the Buddha would not
say that." But even though admonished by those mendicants, Yamaka
obstinately stuck to that misconception and insisted on stating it.

When those mendicants were unable to dissuade Yamaka from that
misconception, they got up from their seats and went to see Venerable
Sāriputta. They told him what had happened, and said, "May
Venerable Sāriputta please go to the mendicant Yamaka out
of sympathy." Sāriputta consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Yamaka and exchanged greetings with him.
Seated to one side he said to Yamaka:

"Is it really true, Reverend Yamaka, that you have such a harmful
misconception: 'As I understand the Buddha's teaching, a mendicant who
has ended the defilements is annihilated and destroyed when their body
breaks up, and doesn't exist after death'?"

"Yes, reverend, that's how I understand the Buddha's teaching."

"What do you think, Yamaka? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, reverend."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, reverend."

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'

What do you think, Reverend Yamaka? Do you regard the Realized One as
form?"

"No, reverend."

"Do you regard the Realized One as feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness?"

"No, reverend."

"What do you think, Reverend Yamaka? Do you regard the Realized One as
in form?"

"No, reverend."

"Or do you regard the Realized One as distinct from form?"

"No, reverend."

"Do you regard the Realized One as in feeling ... or distinct from
feeling ... as in perception ... or distinct from perception ... as in
choices ... or distinct from choices ... as in consciousness?"

"No, reverend."

"Or do you regard the Realized One as distinct from consciousness?"

"No, reverend."

"What do you think, Yamaka? Do you regard the Realized One as possessing
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?"

"No, reverend."

"What do you think, Yamaka? Do you regard the Realized One as one who is
without form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?"

"No, reverend."

"In that case, Reverend Yamaka, since you don't actually find the
Realized One in this very life, is it appropriate to declare: 'As I
understand the Buddha's teaching, a mendicant who has ended the
defilements is annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and
doesn't exist after death.'?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, in my ignorance, I used to have that
misconception. But now that I've heard the teaching from Venerable
Sāriputta, I've given up that misconception, and I've
comprehended the teaching."

"Reverend Yamaka, suppose they were to ask you: 'When their body breaks
up, after death, what happens to a perfected one, who has ended the
defilements?' How would you answer?"

"Reverend, if they were to ask this, I'd answer like this: 'Reverend,
form is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's suffering
has ceased and ended.

Feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness is impermanent.
What's impermanent is suffering. What's suffering has ceased and ended.'
That's how I'd answer such a question."

"Good, good, Reverend Yamaka! Well then, I shall give you a simile to
make the meaning even clearer. Suppose there was a householder or
householder's son who was rich, with a lot of money and great wealth,
and a bodyguard for protection. Then along comes a person who wants to
harm, injure, and threaten him, and take his life. They'd think: 'This
householder or householder's son is rich, with a lot of money and great
wealth, and a bodyguard for protection. It won't be easy to take his
life by force. Why don't I get close to him, then take his life?' So he
goes up to that householder or householder's son and says: 'Sir, I would
serve you.' They would serve that householder or householder's son.
They'd get up before him and go to bed after him, and be obliging,
behaving nicely and speaking politely. The householder or householder's
son would consider them as a friend and companion, and come to trust
them. But when that person realizes that they've gained the trust of the
householder or householder's son, then, when they know he's alone,
they'd take his life with a sharp knife.

What do you think, Yamaka? When that person went to the householder or
householder's son and offered to serve him, weren't they a killer then,
though he didn't know that this was his killer? And when they got up
before him and went to bed after him, being obliging, behaving nicely
and speaking politely, weren't they a killer then, though he didn't know
that this was his killer? And when, knowing he was alone, they took his
life with a sharp knife, weren't they a killer then, though he didn't
know that this was his killer?"

"Yes, reverend."

"In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble
ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the true persons. They regard form as self, self as
having form, form in self, or self in form. They regard feeling ...
perception ... choices ... They regard consciousness as self, self as
having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in consciousness.

They don't truly understand form---which is impermanent---as
impermanent. They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness---which is impermanent---as impermanent.

They don't truly understand form---which is suffering---as suffering.
They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is suffering---as suffering.

They don't truly understand form---which is not-self---as not-self. They
don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is not-self---as not-self.

They don't truly understand form---which is conditioned---as
conditioned. They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness---which is conditioned---as conditioned.

They don't truly understand form---which is a killer---as a killer. They
don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is a killer---as a killer.

They're attracted to form, grasp it, and commit to the thought, 'my
self'. They're attracted to feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, grasp it, and commit to the thought, 'my self'. And when
you've gotten involved with and grasped these five grasping aggregates,
they lead to your lasting harm and suffering.

A learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They don't regard feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness.

They truly understand form---which is impermanent---as impermanent. They
truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is impermanent---as impermanent.

They truly understand form---which is suffering---as suffering. They
truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is suffering---as suffering.

They truly understand form---which is not-self---as not-self. They truly
understand feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness---which
is not-self---as not-self.

They truly understand form---which is conditioned---as conditioned. They
truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness---which is conditioned---as conditioned.

They truly understand form---which is a killer---as a killer. They truly
understand feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness---which
is a killer---as a killer.

Not being attracted to form, they don't grasp it, and commit to the
thought, 'my self'. Not being attracted to feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, they don't grasp it, and commit to the
thought, 'my self'. And when you're not attracted to and don't grasp
these five grasping aggregates, they lead to your lasting welfare and
happiness."

"Reverend Sāriputta, this is how it is when you have such
venerables as spiritual companions to advise and instruct you out of
kindness and sympathy. And after hearing this teaching by Venerable
Sāriputta, my mind is freed from the defilements by not
grasping."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.86 With Anurādha *Anurādhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Now at that time Venerable
Anurādha was staying not far from the Buddha in a
wilderness hut. Then several wanderers of other religions went up to
Venerable Anurādha and exchanged greetings with him. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to one
side and said to him:

"Reverend Anurādha, when a realized one is describing a
realized one---a supreme person, highest of people, who has reached the
highest point---they describe them in these four ways: After death, a
realized one still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and
no longer exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists."

When they said this, Venerable Anurādha said to those
wanderers:

"Reverends, when a realized one is describing a realized one---a supreme
person, highest of people, who has reached the highest point---they
describe them other than these four ways: After death, a realized one
still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer
exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists." When he said
this, the wanderers said to him:

"This mendicant must be junior, recently gone forth, or else a foolish,
incompetent senior mendicant." Then, after rebuking Venerable
Anurādha by calling him "junior" and "foolish", the
wanderers got up from their seats and left.

Soon after they had left, Anurādha thought:

"If those wanderers were to inquire further, how should I answer them so
as to repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with an
untruth? How should I explain in line with his teaching, so that there
would be no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism?"

Then Venerable Anurādha went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and told him all that had happened.

"What do you think, Anurādha? Is form permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ... "So you should truly see ... Seeing this ...
They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.'

What do you think, Anurādha? Do you regard a realized one
as form?"

"No, sir."

"Do you regard a realized one as feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Anurādha? Do you regard a realized one
as in form?"

"No, sir."

"Or do you regard a realized one as distinct from form?"

"No, sir."

"Do you regard a realized one as in feeling ... or distinct from feeling
... as in perception ... or distinct from perception ... as in choices
... or distinct from choices ... as in consciousness ... or as distinct
from consciousness?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Anurādha? Do you regard a realized one
as possessing form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness?"

"No, sir."

"What do you think, Anurādha? Do you regard a realized one
as one who is without form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness?"

"No, sir."

"In that case, Anurādha, since you don't actually find a
realized one in this very life, is it appropriate to declare:
'Reverends, when a realized one is describing a realized one---a supreme
person, highest of people, who has reached the highest point---they
describe them other than these four ways: After death, a realized one
still exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer
exists, or neither still exists nor no longer exists'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, good, Anurādha! In the past, as today, what I
describe is suffering and the cessation of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.87 With Vakkali *Vakkalisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time Venerable Vakkali was staying in a potter's shed, and
he was sick, suffering, gravely ill.

Then he addressed his carers, "Please, reverends, go to the Buddha, and
in my name bow with your head to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the
mendicant Vakkali is sick, suffering, and gravely ill. He bows with his
head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir, please go to the mendicant
Vakkali out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, reverend," those monks replied. They did as he asked. The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robes, went to
Venerable Vakkali. Venerable Vakkali saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance and tried to rise on his cot.

But the Buddha said to him, "It's all right, Vakkali, don't get up.
There are some seats spread out, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said to Vakkali, "I hope you're
keeping well, Vakkali; I hope you're all right. And I hope the pain is
fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not all right, I'm not getting by. My pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is apparent, not its fading."

"I hope you don't have any remorse or regret?"

"Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret."

"I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical
conduct?"

"No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical
conduct."

"In that case, Vakkali, why do you have remorse and regret?"

"For a long time I've wanted to go and see the Buddha, but I was
physically too weak."

"Enough, Vakkali! Why would you want to see this rotten body? One who
sees the teaching sees me. One who sees me sees the teaching. Seeing the
teaching, you see me. Seeing me, you see the teaching.

What do you think, Vakkali? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'"

And then, after giving Venerable Vakkali this advice, the Buddha got up
from his seat and went to the Vulture's Peak Mountain.

Then Venerable Vakkali addressed his carers, "Come on, reverends, lift
my cot and take me to the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili. It's
unthinkable for one like me to die in an inhabited area!"

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants, and did as he asked.
Meanwhile, the Buddha spent the rest of that night and day on Vulture's
Peak Mountain.

Then, late at night, two glorious deities, lighting up the entire
Vulture's Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side.

One deity said to him, "Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is intent on
liberation!"

And another deity said to him, "He'll definitely be well freed!"

This is what those deities said. Then they bowed and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right side, before vanishing
right there.

Then, when the night had passed, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Come, mendicants, go to the mendicant Vakkali and tell him:

'Vakkali, hear the word of the Buddha and two deities.

Late last night, two glorious deities, lighting up the entire Vulture's
Peak, went up to the Buddha, bowed, and stood to one side.

One deity said to him, "Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is intent on
liberation!"

The other deity said to him, "He'll definitely be well freed!"

And the Buddha said, "Do not fear, Vakkali, do not fear! Your death will
not be a bad one; your passing will not be a bad one."'"

"Yes, sir," those monks replied. They went to Vakkali and said to him:

"Vakkali, hear the word of the Buddha and two deities."

Then Vakkali addressed his carers, "Please, reverends, help me off my
cot. It's unthinkable for one like me to listen to the Buddha's
instructions sitting on a high seat."

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants, and helped him off his cot.
They repeated what the Buddha had said.

Vakkali said, "Well then, reverends, in my name bow with your head at
the Buddha's feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the mendicant Vakkali is sick,
suffering, gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' And then
say: 'Form is impermanent. I have no doubt of that. I'm certain that
what is impermanent is suffering. And I'm certain that I have no desire
or greed or fondness for what is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

Feeling is impermanent ...

Perception is impermanent ...

Choices are impermanent ...

Consciousness is impermanent. I have no doubt of that. I'm certain that
what is impermanent is suffering. And I'm certain that I have no desire
or greed or fondness for what is impermanent, suffering, and
perishable.'"

"Yes, reverend," those monks replied, and left. And then, not long after
those mendicants had left, Venerable Vakkali took his life.

Then those mendicants went up to the Buddha and told him Vakkali's
message.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants, "Come, mendicants, let's go to
the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili, where Vakkali, the gentleman,
took his life."

"Yes, sir," they replied.

Then the Buddha together with several mendicants went to the Black Rock
on the slopes of Isigili. The Buddha saw Vakkali off in the distance
lying on his cot, having cast off the aggregates.

Now at that time a cloud of black smoke was moving east, west, north,
south, above, below, and in-between.

The Buddha said to the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you see that cloud of
black smoke moving east, west, north, south, above, below, and
in-between?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's Māra the Wicked searching for Vakkali's
consciousness, wondering: 'Where is Vakkali's consciousness
established?' But since his consciousness is not established, Vakkali is
quenched."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.88 With Assaji *Assajisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time Venerable
Assaji was staying in a monastery built by a Kassapa, and he was sick,
suffering, gravely ill. Then he addressed his carers:

"Please, reverends, go to the Buddha, and in my name bow with your head
to his feet. Say to him: 'Sir, the mendicant Assaji is sick, suffering,
gravely ill. He bows with his head to your feet.' And then say: 'Sir,
please go to the mendicant Assaji out of sympathy.'"

"Yes, reverend," those monks replied. They did as he asked. The Buddha
consented with silence.

Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha came out of retreat and went to
Venerable Assaji. Venerable Assaji saw the Buddha coming off in the
distance, and tried to rise on his cot.

But the Buddha said to him, "It's all right, Assaji, don't get up. There
are some seats spread out, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said, "I hope you're keeping well,
Assaji; I hope you're all right. And I hope the pain is fading, not
growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not all right, I'm not getting by. My pain is terrible and
growing, not fading, its growing is evident, not its fading."

"I hope you don't have any remorse or regret?"

"Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret."

"I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical
conduct?"

"No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical
conduct."

"In that case, Assaji, why do you have remorse and regret?"

"Sir, before my time of illness I meditated having completely stilled
the physical process. But now I can't get immersion. Since I can't get
immersion, I think: 'May I not decline!'"

"Assaji, there are ascetics and brahmins for whom samādhi
is the essence, equating immersion with the ascetic life. They think:
'May we not decline!'

What do you think, Assaji? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?" ...

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'

If they feel a pleasant feeling, they understand that it's impermanent,
that they're not attached to it, and that they don't relish it. If they
feel a painful feeling, they understand that it's impermanent, that
they're not attached to it, and that they don't relish it. If they feel
a neutral feeling, they understand that it's impermanent, that they're
not attached to it, and that they don't relish it. If they feel a
pleasant feeling, they feel it detached. If they feel a painful feeling,
they feel it detached. If they feel a neutral feeling, they feel it
detached. Feeling the end of the body approaching, they understand: 'I
feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of life
approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.' They
understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything
that's felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.'

Suppose an oil lamp depended on oil and a wick to burn. As the oil and
the wick are used up, it would be extinguished due to not being fed.

In the same way, feeling the end of the body approaching, they
understand: 'I feel the end of the body approaching.' Feeling the end of
life approaching, they understand: 'I feel the end of life approaching.'
They understand: 'When my body breaks up and my life is over, everything
that's felt, being no longer relished, will become cool right here.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.89 With Khemaka *Khemakasutta*

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Now at that time Venerable
Khemaka was staying in the Jujube Tree Monastery, and he was sick,
suffering, gravely ill.

In the late afternoon those senior mendicants came out of retreat and
addressed Venerable Dāsaka, "Please, Reverend
Dāsaka, go to the mendicant Khemaka and say to him:
'Reverend Khemaka, the seniors hope you're keeping well; they hope
you're all right. They hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that
its fading is evident, not its growing.'"

"Yes, reverends," replied Dāsaka. He went to Khemaka and
said to him:

"Reverend Khemaka, the seniors hope you're keeping well; they hope
you're all right. They hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that
its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Reverend, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. My pain is terrible
and growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

Then Dāsaka went to those seniors and told them what had
happened. They said,

"Please, Reverend Dāsaka, go to the mendicant Khemaka and
say to him: 'Reverend Khemaka, the seniors say that these five grasping
aggregates have been taught by the Buddha, that is: the grasping
aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Do
you regard anything among these five grasping aggregates as self or as
belonging to self?'"

"Yes, reverends," replied Dāsaka. He relayed the message to
Khemaka, who replied:

"These five grasping aggregates have been taught by the Buddha, that is:
the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. I do not regard anything among these five grasping
aggregates as self or as belonging to self."

Then Dāsaka went to those seniors and told them what had
happened. They said:

"Please, Reverend Dāsaka, go to the mendicant Khemaka and
say to him: 'Reverend Khemaka, the seniors say that these five grasping
aggregates have been taught by the Buddha, that is: the grasping
aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. If,
as it seems, Venerable Khemaka does not regard anything among these five
grasping aggregates as self or as belonging to self, then he is a
perfected one, with defilements ended.'"

"Yes, reverends," replied Dāsaka. He relayed the message to
Khemaka, who replied:

"These five grasping aggregates have been taught by the Buddha, that is:
the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. I do not regard anything among these five grasping
aggregates as self or as belonging to self, yet I am not a perfected
one, with defilements ended. For when it comes to the five grasping
aggregates I'm not rid of the conceit 'I am'. But I don't regard
anything as 'I am this'."

Then Dāsaka went to those seniors and told them what had
happened. They said:

"Please, Reverend Dāsaka, go to the mendicant Khemaka and
say to him: 'Reverend Khemaka, the seniors ask, when you say "I am",
what is it that you're talking about? Is it form or apart from form? Is
it feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, or apart from
consciousness? When you say "I am", what is it that you're talking
about?"

"Yes, reverends," replied Dāsaka. He relayed the message to
Khemaka, who replied:

"Enough, Reverend Dāsaka! What's the point in running back
and forth? Bring my staff, I'll go to see the senior mendicants myself."

Then Venerable Khemaka, leaning on a staff, went to those senior
mendicants and exchanged greetings with them. When the greetings and
polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side. They said to
him:

"Reverend Khemaka, when you say 'I am', what is it that you're talking
about? Is it form or apart from form? Is it feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, or apart from consciousness? When you say 'I
am', what is it that you're talking about?"

"Reverends, I don't say 'I am' with reference to form, or apart from
form. I don't say 'I am' with reference to feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness, or apart from consciousness. For when it
comes to the five grasping aggregates I'm not rid of the conceit 'I am'.
But I don't regard anything as 'I am this'.

It's like the scent of a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus.
Would it be right to say that the scent belongs to the petals or the
stalk or the pistil?"

"No, reverend."

"Then, reverends, how should it be said?"

"It would be right to say that the scent belongs to the flower."

"In the same way, reverends, I don't say 'I am' with reference to form,
or apart from form. I don't say 'I am' with reference to feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, or apart from consciousness.
For when it comes to the five grasping aggregates I'm not rid of the
conceit 'I am'. But I don't regard anything as 'I am this'.

Although a noble disciple has given up the five lower fetters, they
still have a lingering residue of the conceit 'I am', the desire 'I am',
and the underlying tendency 'I am' which has not been eradicated. After
some time they meditate observing rise and fall in the five grasping
aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the
ending of form. Such is feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are
choices ... Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness,
such is the ending of consciousness.' As they do so, that lingering
residue is eradicated.

Suppose there was a cloth that was dirty and soiled, so the owners give
it to a launderer. The launderer kneads it thoroughly with salt, lye,
and cow dung, and rinses it in clear water. Although that cloth is clean
and bright, it still has a lingering scent of salt, lye, or cow dung
that had not been eradicated. The launderer returns it to its owners,
who store it in a fragrant casket. And that lingering scent would be
eradicated.

In the same way, although a noble disciple has given up the five lower
fetters, they still have a lingering residue of the conceit 'I am', the
desire 'I am', and the underlying tendency 'I am' which has not been
eradicated. After some time they meditate observing rise and fall in the
five grasping aggregates. 'Such is form, such is the origin of form,
such is the ending of form. Such is feeling ... Such is perception ...
Such are choices ... Such is consciousness, such is the origin of
consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.' As they do so, that
lingering residue is eradicated."

When he said this, the senior mendicants said to Venerable Khemaka, "We
didn't want to trouble Venerable Khemaka with our questions. But you're
capable of explaining, teaching, asserting, establishing, clarifying,
analyzing, and revealing the Buddha's instructions in detail. And that's
just what you've done."

That's what Venerable Khemaka said. Satisfied, the senior mendicants
approved what Venerable Khemaka said. And while this discourse was being
spoken, the minds of sixty senior mendicants and of Venerable Khemaka
were freed from defilements by not grasping.

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.90 With Channa *Channasutta*

At one time several senior mendicants were staying near Varanasi, in the
deer park at Isipatana.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Channa came out of retreat. Taking
a latchkey, he went from dwelling to dwelling, going up to the senior
mendicants and saying, "May the venerable senior mendicants advise me
and instruct me! May they give me a Dhamma talk so that I can see the
teaching!"

When he said this, the senior mendicants said to Venerable Channa:

"Reverend Channa, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness
are impermanent. Form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness
are not-self. All conditions are impermanent. All things are not-self."

Then Venerable Channa thought, "I too think in this way. ... And yet my
mind does not leap forth, gain confidence, settle down, and become
decided about the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all
attachments, the ending of craving, fading away, cessation,
extinguishment. Grasping arises from anxiety. And the mind reverts to
thinking: 'So then who exactly is my self?' But that doesn't happen for
someone who sees the teaching. Who can teach me the Dhamma so that I can
see the teaching?"

Then Venerable Channa thought, "The Venerable Ānanda is staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. He's praised by the Buddha
and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He's quite capable of
teaching me the Dhamma so that I can see the teaching. Since I have so
much trust in Venerable Ānanda, why don't I go to see him?"

Then Channa set his lodgings in order and, taking his bowl and robe, set
out for Kosambī. He went to see Ānanda in Ghosita's
Monastery, exchanged greetings with him, and told him what had happened.
Then he said,

"May Venerable Ānanda advise me and instruct me! May he give me a Dhamma
talk so that I can see the teaching!"

"I'm already delighted with Venerable Channa. Hopefully you've opened
yourself up and severed your hard-heartedness. Listen well, Channa. You
are capable of understanding the teaching."

Then right away Channa was filled with lofty rapture and joy, "It seems
I'm capable of understanding the teaching!"

"Reverend Channa, I heard and learned in the presence of the Buddha his
advice to the mendicant Kaccānagotta:

'Kaccāna, this world mostly relies on the duality of
existence and non-existence.

But when you truly see the origin of the world with right understanding,
the concept of non-existence regarding the world does not occur. And
when you truly see the cessation of the world with right understanding,
the concept of existence regarding the world does not occur.

The world is for the most part shackled by attraction, grasping, and
insisting.

But if---when it comes to this attraction, grasping, mental fixation,
insistence, and underlying tendency---you don't get attracted, grasp,
and commit to the thought, "my self", you'll have no doubt or
uncertainty that what arises is just suffering arising, and what ceases
is just suffering ceasing. Your knowledge about this is independent of
others.

This is how right view is defined.

"All exists": this is one extreme.

"All does not exist": this is the second extreme.

Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One teaches by the middle way:

"Ignorance is a condition for choices. Choices are a condition for
consciousness. ... That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices
cease. ... That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases."'"

"Reverend Ānanda, this is how it is when you have such venerables as
spiritual companions to advise and instruct you out of kindness and
sympathy. And now that I've heard this teaching from Venerable Ānanda,
I've comprehended the teaching."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.91 Rāhula *Rāhulasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Rāhula went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that there's no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body
and all external stimuli?"

"Rāhula, one truly sees any kind of form at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

One truly sees any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

That's how to know and see so that there's no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.92 Rāhula (2nd) *Dutiyarāhulasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, Rāhula said to the Buddha:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed?"

"Rāhula, when one truly sees any kind of form at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle;
inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self,'
one is freed by not grasping.

One truly sees any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ... When
one truly sees any kind of consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self,' one is freed by not
grasping.

That's how to know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Flowers

### SN 22.93 A River *Nadīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Suppose, mendicants, there was a mountain river that flowed swiftly,
going far, carrying all before it. If wild sugarcane, kusa grass, reeds,
vetiver, or trees grew on either bank, they'd overhang the river. And if
a person who was being swept along by the current grabbed the wild
sugarcane, kusa grass, reeds, vetiver, or trees, it'd break off, and
they'd come to ruin because of that.

In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble
ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble
ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained
in the teaching of the true persons.

They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. But their form breaks off, and they come to ruin because of that.
They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness as
self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in self, or self in
consciousness. But their consciousness breaks off, and they come to ruin
because of that.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.94 Flowers *Pupphasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I do not argue with the world; it is the world that argues
with me. When your speech is in line with the teaching you do not argue
with anyone in the world. What the astute deem as not existing, I too
say does not exist. What the astute deem as existing, I too say exists.

And what do the astute deem as not existing, which I too say does not
exist? Form that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness that is permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.
This is what the astute deem as not existing, which I too say does not
exist.

And what do the astute deem as existing, which I too say exists? Form
that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable.

Feeling ... Perception ... Choices ...

Consciousness that is impermanent, suffering, and perishable. This is
what the astute deem as existing, which I too say exists.

There is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized One
understands and comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

And what is that temporal phenomenon in the world? Form is a temporal
phenomenon in the world that the Realized One understands and
comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts, establishes, clarifies,
analyzes, and reveals it.

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and
sightless, who does not know or see?

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is a temporal phenomenon in the world that the Realized
One understands and comprehends. Then he explains, teaches, asserts,
establishes, clarifies, analyzes, and reveals it.

This being so, what can I do about a foolish ordinary person, blind and
sightless, who does not know or see?

Suppose there was a blue water lily, or a pink or white lotus. Though it
sprouted and grew in the water, it would rise up above the water and
stand with no water clinging to it. In the same way, though I was born
and grew up in the world, I live having mastered the world, unsullied by
the world."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.95 A Lump of Foam *Pheṇapiṇḍūpamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Ayojjhā on the bank
of the Ganges river. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, suppose this Ganges river was carrying along a big lump of
foam. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it,
examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely
vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there be in a
lump of foam?

In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of form at
all---past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine;
inferior or superior; near or far---examining it carefully. And it
appears to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For
what core could there be in form?

Suppose it was autumn, when the heavens rain heavily, and a bubble on
the water forms and pops right away. And a person with clear eyes would
see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear
to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core
could there be in a water bubble?

In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of feeling
at all ... examining it carefully. And it appears to them as completely
vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there be in
feeling?

Suppose that in the last month of summer, at noon, a shimmering mirage
appears. And a person with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it,
examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as completely
vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there be in a
mirage?

In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of
perception at all ... examining it carefully. And it appears to them as
completely void, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there be
in perception?

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. Wandering in search of
heartwood, they'd take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There they'd see
a big banana tree, straight and young and grown free of defects. They'd
cut it down at the base, cut off the top, and unroll the coiled sheaths.
But they wouldn't even find sapwood, much less heartwood. And a person
with clear eyes would see it and contemplate it, examining it carefully.
And it would appear to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and
insubstantial. For what core could there be in a banana tree?

In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of choices
at all ... examining them carefully. And they appear to them as
completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there
be in choices?

Suppose a magician or their apprentice was to perform a magic trick at
the crossroads. And a person with clear eyes would see it and
contemplate it, examining it carefully. And it would appear to them as
completely vacuous, hollow, and insubstantial. For what core could there
be in a magic trick?

In the same way, a mendicant sees and contemplates any kind of
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
coarse or fine; inferior or superior; near or far---examining it
carefully. And it appears to them as completely vacuous, hollow, and
insubstantial. For what core could there be in consciousness?

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed. They understand: '... there is nothing
further for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Form is like a lump of foam;\
> feeling is like a bubble;\
> perception seems like a mirage;\
> choices like a banana tree;\
> and consciousness like a magic trick:\
> so taught the kinsman of the Sun.
>
> However you contemplate them,\
> examining them carefully,\
> they're vacuous and hollow\
> when you look at them closely.
>
> Concerning this body,\
> he of vast wisdom has taught\
> that when three things are given up,\
> you'll see this form discarded.
>
> Vitality, warmth, and consciousness:\
> when they leave the body,\
> it lies there tossed aside,\
> food for others, mindless.
>
> Such is this process,\
> this illusion, this lament of fools.\
> It's said to be a killer,\
> for no core is found here.
>
> An energetic mendicant\
> should examine the aggregates like this,\
> with situational awareness and mindfulness\
> whether by day or by night.
>
> They should give up all yoking,\
> and make a refuge for themselves.\
> They should live as though their head was on fire,\
> aspiring to the state that does not pass."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.96 A Lump of Cow Dung *Gomayapiṇḍasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, is there any form at all that's permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, and will last forever and ever? Is there any feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's permanent,
everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?"

"Mendicant, there is no form at all that's permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. There's no
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and
ever."

Then the Buddha, picking up a lump of cow dung, said to the mendicants:

"There's not even this much of any incarnation that's permanent,
everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. If
there were, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of
suffering would not be found. But since there isn't, this living of the
spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering is found.

Once upon a time I was an anointed aristocratic king. I had 84,000
cities, with the capital Kusāvatī the foremost. I had
84,000 palaces, with the palace named Principle the foremost. I had
84,000 chambers, with the great foyer the foremost. I had 84,000 couches
made of ivory or heartwood or gold or silver, spread with woolen
covers---shag-piled or embroidered with flowers---and spread with a fine
deer hide, with a canopy above and red pillows at both ends. I had
84,000 bull elephants with gold adornments and banners, covered with
snow gold netting, with the royal bull elephant named Sabbath the
foremost. I had 84,000 horses with gold adornments and banners, covered
with snow gold netting, with the royal steed named Thundercloud the
foremost. I had 84,000 chariots with gold adornments and banners,
covered with snow gold netting, with the chariot named Triumph the
foremost. I had 84,000 jewels, with the jewel-treasure the foremost. I
had 84,000 women, with Queen Subhaddā the foremost. I had
84,000 aristocrat vassals, with the commander-treasure the foremost. I
had 84,000 milk cows with silken reins and bronze pails. I had
8,400,000,000 fine cloths of linen, cotton, silk, and wool. I had 84,000
servings of food, which were presented to me as offerings in the morning
and evening.

Of those 84,000 cities, I only stayed in one, the capital
Kusāvatī. Of those 84,000 mansions, I only dwelt in one,
the Palace of Principle. Of those 84,000 chambers, I only dwelt in the
great foyer. Of those 84,000 couches, I only used one, made of ivory or
heartwood or gold or silver. Of those 84,000 bull elephants, I only rode
one, the royal bull elephant named Sabbath. Of those 84,000 horses, I
only rode one, the royal horse named Thundercloud. Of those 84,000
chariots, I only rode one, the chariot named Triumph. Of those 84,000
women, I was only served by one, a maiden of the aristocratic or peasant
classes. Of those 8,400,000,000 cloths, I only wore one pair, made of
fine linen, cotton, silk, and wool. Of those 84,000 servings of food, I
only had one, eating at most a cup of rice with suitable sauce.

And so all those conditioned phenomena have passed, ceased, and
perished. So impermanent are conditions, so unstable are conditions, so
unreliable are conditions. This is quite enough for you to become
disillusioned, dispassionate, and freed regarding all conditions."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.97 A Fingernail *Nakhasikhāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, is there any form at all that's permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, and will last forever and ever? Is there any feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's permanent,
everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?"

"Mendicant, there is no form at all that's permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. There's no
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and
ever."

Then the Buddha, picking up a little bit of dirt under his fingernail,
addressed that mendicant:

"There's not even this much of any form that's permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. If there were,
this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering
would not be found. But since there isn't, this living of the spiritual
life for the complete ending of suffering is found.

There's not even this much of any feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness that's permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and
will last forever and ever. If there were, this living of the spiritual
life for the complete ending of suffering would not be found. But since
there isn't, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending
of suffering is found.

What do you think, mendicant? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.98 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, is there any form at all that's permanent, everlasting, eternal,
imperishable, and will last forever and ever? Is there any feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's permanent,
everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever?"

"Mendicant, there is no form at all that's permanent, everlasting,
eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and ever. There's no
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all that's
permanent, everlasting, eternal, imperishable, and will last forever and
ever."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.99 A Leash *Gaddulabaddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. No first point is
found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving.

There comes a time when the ocean dries up and evaporates and is no
more. But still, I say, there is no making an end of suffering for
sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and
fettered by craving.

There comes a time when Sineru the king of mountains is burned up and
destroyed, and is no more. But still, I say, there is no making an end
of suffering for sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving.

There comes a time when the great earth is burned up and destroyed, and
is no more. But still, I say, there is no making an end of suffering for
sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and
fettered by craving.

Suppose a dog on a leash was tethered to a strong post or pillar. It
would just keep running and circling around that post or pillar.

In the same way, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the
noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in their teaching.
They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in
their teaching. They regard form ... feeling ... perception ... choices
... consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness
in self, or self in consciousness. They just keep running and circling
around form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Doing so,
they're not freed from form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. They're not freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're not freed from
suffering, I say.

A learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form ... feeling ... perception ... choices ... or
consciousness as self, self as having consciousness, consciousness in
self, or self in consciousness. They don't keep running and circling
around form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. By not
doing so, they're freed from form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. They're freed from rebirth, old age, and death, from
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They're freed from
suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.100 A Leash (2nd) *Dutiyagaddulabaddhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, transmigration has no known beginning. No first point is
found of sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by
ignorance and fettered by craving. Suppose a dog on a leash was tethered
to a strong post or pillar. Whether walking, standing, sitting, or lying
down, it stays right beside that post or pillar.

In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person regards form like this:
'This is mine, I am this, this is my self.' They regard feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness like this: 'This is mine, I am
this, this is my self.' When walking, they walk right beside the five
grasping aggregates. When standing ... sitting ... lying down, they lie
down right beside the five grasping aggregates.

So you should regularly check your own mind: 'For a long time this mind
has been corrupted by greed, hate, and delusion.' Sentient beings are
corrupted because the mind is corrupted. Sentient beings are purified
because the mind is purified.

Mendicants, have you seen the picture called 'Conduct'?"

"Yes, sir."

"That picture was elaborated by the mind, but the mind is even more
elaborate than that.

So you should regularly check your own mind: 'For a long time this mind
has been corrupted by greed, hate, and delusion.' Sentient beings are
corrupted because the mind is corrupted. Sentient beings are purified
because the mind is purified.

I don't see any other order of beings as elaborate as the animal realm.
The creatures in the animal realm were elaborated by the mind, but the
mind is even more elaborate than that.

So you should regularly check your own mind: 'For a long time this mind
has been corrupted by greed, hate, and delusion.' Sentient beings are
corrupted because the mind is corrupted. Sentient beings are purified
because the mind is purified.

Suppose an artist or painter had some dye, red lac, turmeric, indigo, or
rose madder. And on a polished plank or a wall or a canvas they'd create
the form of a woman or a man, whole in its major and minor limbs.

In the same way, when an unlearned ordinary person creates a future
life, all they create is form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?" ...

"So you should truly see ... Seeing this ... They understand: '... there
is nothing further for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.101 The Adze *Vāsijaṭasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I say that the ending of defilements is for one who knows
and sees, not for one who does not know or see. For one who knows and
sees what? 'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending
of form. Such is feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are choices ...
Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the
ending of consciousness.' The ending of the defilements is for one who
knows and sees this.

When a mendicant is not committed to development, they might wish: 'If
only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!' Even so,
their mind is not freed from defilements by not grasping. Why is that?
You should say: 'It's because they're undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what?
Undeveloped in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five
powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. But she
had not properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. That
chicken might wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell
with their claws and beak and hatch safely!' But they can't break out
and hatch safely. Why is that? Because that chicken with eight or ten or
twelve eggs has not properly sat on them to keep them warm and
incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is not committed to development, they
might wish: 'If only my mind was freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is not freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they're
undeveloped.' Undeveloped in what? Undeveloped in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of
psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening
factors, and the noble eightfold path.

When a mendicant is committed to development, they might not wish: 'If
only my mind were freed from the defilements by not grasping!' Even so,
their mind is freed from defilements by not grasping. Why is that? You
should say: 'It's because they are developed.' Developed in what?
Developed in the four kinds of mindfulness meditation, the four right
efforts, the four bases of psychic power, the five faculties, the five
powers, the seven awakening factors, and the noble eightfold path.

Suppose there was a chicken with eight or ten or twelve eggs. And she
properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated. That chicken might
not wish: 'If only my chicks could break out of the eggshell with their
claws and beak and hatch safely!' But still they can break out and hatch
safely. Why is that? Because that chicken with eight or ten or twelve
eggs properly sat on them to keep them warm and incubated.

In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they
might not wish: 'If only my mind were freed from the defilements by not
grasping!' Even so, their mind is freed from defilements by not
grasping. Why is that? You should say: 'It's because they are
developed.' Developed in what? Developed in the four kinds of
mindfulness meditation, the four right efforts, the four bases of
psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven awakening
factors, and the noble eightfold path.

Suppose a carpenter or their apprentice sees the marks of his fingers
and thumb on the handle of his adze. They don't know how much of the
handle was worn away today, how much yesterday, and how much previously.
They just know what has been worn away.

In the same way, when a mendicant is committed to development, they
don't know how much of the defilements were worn away today, how much
yesterday, and how much previously. They just know what has been worn
away. Suppose there was a sea-faring ship bound together with ropes. For
six months they deteriorated in the water. Then in the cold season it
was hauled up on dry land, where the ropes were weathered by wind and
sun. When the monsoon clouds soaked it with rain, the ropes would
readily collapse and rot away. In the same way, when a mendicant is
committed to development their fetters readily collapse and rot away."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.102 The Perception of Impermanence *Aniccasaññāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when the perception of impermanence is developed and
cultivated it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth
in the realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. It
eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

In the autumn, a farmer ploughing with a large plough shears through all
the root networks. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence
is developed ... it eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

A reed-cutter, having cut the reeds, grabs them at the top and shakes
them down, shakes them about, and shakes them off. In the same way, when
the perception of impermanence is developed ... it eradicates all
conceit 'I am'.

When the stalk of a bunch of mangoes is cut, all the mangoes attached to
the stalk will follow along. In the same way, when the perception of
impermanence is developed ... it eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

The rafters of a bungalow all lean to the peak, slope to the peak, and
meet at the peak, so the peak is said to be the topmost of them all. In
the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed ... it
eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

Of all kinds of fragrant root, spikenard is said to be the best. In the
same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed ... it
eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed
... it eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

Of all kinds of fragrant flower, jasmine is said to be the best. In the
same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed ... it
eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

All lesser kings are vassals of a wheel-turning monarch, so the
wheel-turning monarch is said to be the foremost of them all. In the
same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed ... it
eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

The radiance of all the stars is not worth a sixteenth part of the
moon's radiance, so the moon's radiance is said to be the best of them
all. In the same way, when the perception of impermanence is developed
... it eradicates all conceit 'I am'.

In the autumn, the heavens are clear and cloudless. And as the sun is
rising to the firmament, having dispelled all the darkness of space, it
shines and glows and radiates. In the same way, when the perception of
impermanence is developed and cultivated it eliminates all desire for
sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the realm of luminous form, and for
rebirth in a future life. It eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all
conceit 'I am'.

And how is the perception of impermanence developed and cultivated so
that ... it eradicates all conceit 'I am'? 'Such is form, such is the
origin of form, such is the ending of form. Such is feeling ... Such is
perception ... Such are choices ... Such is consciousness, such is the
origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.'

That's how the perception of impermanence is developed and cultivated so
that it eliminates all desire for sensual pleasures, for rebirth in the
realm of luminous form, and for rebirth in a future life. That's how it
eliminates all ignorance and eradicates all conceit 'I am'."

**the final fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Sides

### SN 22.103 Sides *Antasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these four sides. What four? The side of
substantial reality, the side of the origin of substantial reality, the
side of the cessation of substantial reality, and the side of the
practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality. And what is
the side of substantial reality? It should be said: the five grasping
aggregates. What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called the side
of substantial reality.

And what is the side of the origin of substantial reality? It's the
craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed,
taking pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual
pleasures, craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence.
This is called the side of the origin of substantial reality.

And what is the side of the cessation of substantial reality? It's the
fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left
over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to
it. This is called the side of the cessation of substantial reality.

And what is the side of the practice that leads to the cessation of
substantial reality? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
side of the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.
These are the four sides."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.104 Suffering *Dukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you suffering, the origin of suffering, the
cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of
suffering. Listen ...

And what is suffering? It should be said: the five grasping aggregates.
What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called suffering.

And what is the origin of suffering? It's the craving that leads to
future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure
wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving to
continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is called the
origin of suffering.

And what is the cessation of suffering? It's the fading away and
cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it
away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. This is
called the cessation of suffering.

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering? It is
simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the practice that leads
to the cessation of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.105 Substantial Reality *Sakkāyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you substantial reality, the origin of
substantial reality, the cessation of substantial reality, and the
practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality. Listen ...

And what is substantial reality? It should be said: the five grasping
aggregates. What five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. This is called
substantial reality.

And what is the origin of substantial reality? It's the craving that
leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking
pleasure wherever it lands. That is, craving for sensual pleasures,
craving to continue existence, and craving to end existence. This is
called the origin of substantial reality.

And what is the cessation of substantial reality? It's the fading away
and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving
it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it. This is
called the cessation of substantial reality.

And what is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial
reality? It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion. This is called the
practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.106 Should Be Completely Understood *Pariññeyyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that should be completely
understood, complete understanding, and the person who has completely
understood. Listen ...

And what things should be completely understood? Form, feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness. These are called the things that
should be completely understood.

And what is complete understanding? The ending of greed, hate, and
delusion. This is called complete understanding.

And what is the person who has completely understood? It should be said:
a perfected one, the venerable of such and such name and clan. This is
called the person who has completely understood."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.107 Ascetics (1st) *Samaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? That
is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand these five
grasping aggregates' gratification, drawback, and escape ...

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.108 Ascetics (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? That
is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand these five
grasping aggregates' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape
... Those venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin ...

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand ... Those
venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live
having realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.109 A Stream-Enterer *Sotāpannasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? That
is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. A noble disciple comes to truly understand these five
grasping aggregates' origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and
escape. Such a noble disciple is called a stream-enterer, not liable to
be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.110 A Perfected One *Arahantasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, there are these five grasping aggregates. What five? That
is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. A mendicant comes to be freed by not grasping after truly
understanding these five grasping aggregates' origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a mendicant is called a
perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the spiritual
journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, achieved their
own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued existence, and is
rightly freed through enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.111 Giving Up Desire *Chandappahānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up any desire, greed, relishing, and
craving for form. Thus that form will be given up, cut off at the root,
made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future.

You should give up any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness. Thus that consciousness
will be given up, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump,
obliterated, and unable to arise in the future."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.112 Giving Up Desire (2nd) *Dutiyachandappahānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up any desire, greed, relishing, and
craving for form; and any attraction, grasping, mental fixation,
insistence, and underlying tendencies. Thus that form will be given up,
cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, obliterated, and unable to
arise in the future.

You should give up any desire, greed, relishing, and craving for feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness; and any attraction,
grasping, mental fixation, insistence, and underlying tendencies. Thus
that consciousness will be given up, cut off at the root, made like a
palm stump, obliterated, and unable to arise in the future."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on a Dhamma Speaker

### SN 22.113 Ignorance *Avijjāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'ignorance'. What is ignorance?
And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when an unlearned ordinary person doesn't understand
form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation. They don't understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.114 Knowledge *Vijjāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'knowledge'. What is knowledge?
And how is a knowledgeable person defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a learned noble disciple understands form, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They understand feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.115 A Dhamma speaker *Dhammakathikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of a 'Dhamma speaker'. How is a Dhamma speaker
defined?"

"Mendicant, if a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment,
dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they're qualified to be called
a 'mendicant who speaks on Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding form, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding form, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant
who has attained extinguishment in this very life'.

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, for its fading away and
cessation, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who speaks on
Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding consciousness, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding consciousness, they're qualified to be called a
'mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.116 A Dhamma speaker (2nd) *Dutiyadhammakathikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of a 'Dhamma speaker'. How is a Dhamma speaker defined?
How is a mendicant who practices in line with the teaching defined? And
how is a mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life
defined?"

"Mendicant, if a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment,
dispassion, and cessation regarding form, they're qualified to be called
a 'mendicant who speaks on Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding form, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding form, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant
who has attained extinguishment in this very life'.

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness, for its fading away and
cessation, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who speaks on
Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding consciousness, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding consciousness, they're qualified to be called a
'mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.117 Shackles *Bandhanasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the
noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the
noble ones. They've not seen true persons, and are neither skilled nor
trained in the teaching of the true persons. They regard form as self,
self as having form, form in self, or self in form. They're called an
unlearned ordinary person who is bound to form, inside and out. They see
neither the near shore nor the far shore. They're born in bonds and die
in bonds, and in bonds they go from this world to the next.

They regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness as
self. They're called an unlearned ordinary person who is bound to
consciousness, inside and out. They see neither the near shore nor the
far shore. They're born in bonds and die in bonds, and in bonds they go
from this world to the next.

A learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and
trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They've seen true persons,
and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the true persons. They
don't regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in
form. They're called a learned noble disciple who is not bound to form,
inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore. They're exempt
from suffering, I say.

They don't regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
as self. They're called a learned noble disciple who is not bound to
consciousness, inside or out. They see the near shore and the far shore.
They're exempt from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.118 Questioning *Paripucchitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"What do you think, mendicants? Do you regard form like this: 'This is
mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! Form should be truly seen with right understanding
like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' Do
you regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness like
this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicants! Consciousness should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.119 Questioning (2nd) *Dutiyaparipucchitasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"What do you think, mendicants? Do you regard form like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! Form should be truly seen with right understanding
like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' Do
you regard feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness like
this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicants! Consciousness should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.120 Things Prone To Being Fettered *Saṁyojaniyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that are prone to being
fettered, and the fetter. Listen ...

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the
fetter?

Form is something that's prone to being fettered. The desire and greed
for it is the fetter.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is something that's prone to being fettered. The desire
and greed for it is the fetter.

These are called the things that are prone to being fettered, and this
is the fetter."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.121 Things Prone to Fuel Grasping *Upādāniyasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that fuel grasping, and the
grasping. Listen ...

What are the things that fuel grasping? And what is the grasping?

Form is something that's prone to fuel grasping. The desire and greed
for it is the grasping.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is something that's prone to fuel grasping. The desire and
greed for it is the grasping.

These are called the things that fuel grasping, and this is the
grasping."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.122 An Ethical Mendicant *Sīlavantasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park
at Isipatana. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Sāriputta, and said:

"Reverend Sāriputta, what things should an ethical
mendicant rationally apply the mind to?"

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, an ethical mendicant should rationally
apply the mind to the five grasping aggregates as impermanent, as
suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. What
five? That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness. An ethical mendicant should rationally apply
the mind to these five grasping aggregates as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. It's possible that an
ethical mendicant who rationally applies the mind to the five grasping
aggregates will realize the fruit of stream-entry."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a mendicant
stream-enterer rationally apply the mind to?"

"A mendicant stream-enterer should also rationally apply the mind to
these five grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. It's
possible that a mendicant stream-enterer who rationally applies the mind
to the five grasping aggregates will realize the fruit of once-return."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a mendicant
once-returner rationally apply the mind to?"

"A mendicant once-returner should also rationally apply the mind to
these five grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. It's
possible that a mendicant once-returner who rationally applies the mind
to the five grasping aggregates will realize the fruit of non-return."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a mendicant
non-returner rationally apply the mind to?"

"A mendicant non-returner should also rationally apply the mind to these
five grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. It's possible
that a mendicant non-returner who rationally applies the mind to the
five grasping aggregates will realize perfection."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a perfected one
rationally apply the mind to?"

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, a perfected one should also rationally
apply the mind to the five grasping aggregates as impermanent, as
suffering, as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an
affliction, as alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. A
perfected one has nothing more to do, and nothing that needs
improvement. Still, these things, when developed and cultivated, lead to
blissful meditation in this life, and also to mindfulness and
situational awareness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.123 Learned *Sutavantasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park
at Isipatana. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Sāriputta, bowed, sat down to one side, and said:

"Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a learned mendicant
rationally apply the mind to?"

"A learned mendicant should rationally apply the mind to these five
grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. What five? That is,
the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. A learned mendicant should rationally apply the mind to
these five grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. It's
possible that a learned mendicant who rationally applies the mind to the
five grasping aggregates will realize the fruit of stream-entry."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a mendicant
stream-enterer rationally apply the mind to?"

"A mendicant stream-enterer should also rationally apply the mind to
these five grasping aggregates as impermanent ... as not-self. It's
possible that a mendicant stream-enterer who rationally applies the mind
to the five grasping aggregates will realize the fruit of once-return."
... "It's possible that a mendicant once-returner who rationally applies
the mind to the five grasping aggregates will realize the fruit of
non-return." ... "It's possible that a mendicant non-returner who
rationally applies the mind to the five grasping aggregates will realize
the fruit of perfection."

"But Reverend Sāriputta, what things should a perfected one
rationally apply the mind to?"

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, a perfected one should rationally apply
the mind to the five grasping aggregates as impermanent, as suffering,
as diseased, as a boil, as a dart, as misery, as an affliction, as
alien, as falling apart, as empty, as not-self. A perfected one has
nothing more to do, and nothing that needs improvement. Still, these
things, when developed and cultivated, lead to blissful meditation in
this life, and also to mindfulness and situational awareness."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.124 With Kappa *Kappasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Kappa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that there's no I-making,
mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body
and all external stimuli?"

"Kappa, one truly sees any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.'

One truly sees any kind of feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness at all---past, future, or present; internal or external;
solid or subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all*
consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

That's how to know and see so that there's no I-making, mine-making, or
underlying tendency to conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.125 With Kappa (2nd) *Dutiyakappasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, Venerable Kappa said to the Buddha:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed?"

"Kappa, one is freed by not grasping having truly seen any kind of form
at all---past, future, or present; internal or external; solid or
subtle; inferior or superior; far or near: *all* form---with right
understanding: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

One is freed by not grasping having truly seen any kind of feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

That's how to know and see so that the mind is rid of I-making,
mine-making, and conceit for this conscious body and all external
stimuli; and going beyond discrimination, it's peaceful and well freed."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Ignorance

### SN 22.126 Liable To Originate *Samudayadhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'ignorance'. What is ignorance?
And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly
understand form, which is liable to originate, as form which is liable
to originate. They don't truly understand form, which is liable to
vanish, as form which is liable to vanish. They don't truly understand
form, which is liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable
to originate and vanish.

They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is
liable to originate. They don't truly understand consciousness, which is
liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish. They don't
truly understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish,
as consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

When he said this, the mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'knowledge'. What is knowledge?
And how is a knowledgeable person defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a learned noble disciple truly understands form,
which is liable to originate, as form which is liable to originate. They
truly understand form, which is liable to vanish, as form which is
liable to vanish. They truly understand form, which is liable to
originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish.

They truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, which is liable to originate, as consciousness which is
liable to originate. They truly understand consciousness, which is
liable to vanish, as consciousness which is liable to vanish. They truly
understand consciousness, which is liable to originate and vanish, as
consciousness which is liable to originate and vanish.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.127 Liable To Originate (2nd) *Dutiyasamudayadhammasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park
at Isipatana. ...

Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, it's when an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly
understand form, which is liable to originate ... liable to vanish ...
liable to originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and
vanish.

They don't truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, which is liable to originate ... liable to vanish ...
liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to
originate and vanish.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.128 Liable To Originate (3rd) *Tatiyasamudayadhammasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park
at Isipatana. ...

Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, it's when a learned noble disciple truly understands form,
which is liable to originate ... liable to vanish ... liable to
originate and vanish, as form which is liable to originate and vanish.

They truly understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, which is liable to originate ... liable to vanish ...
liable to originate and vanish, as consciousness which is liable to
originate and vanish.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.129 Gratification *Assādasutta*

At Varanasi. Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.130 Gratification (2nd) *Dutiyaassādasutta*

At Varanasi.

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, a learned noble disciple truly understands the gratification,
the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.131 Origin *Samudayasutta*

At Varanasi.

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when
it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.132 Origin (2nd) *Dutiyasamudayasutta*

At Varanasi. Mahākoṭṭhita said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, a learned noble disciple truly understands the origin, the
ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.133 With Koṭṭhita *Koṭṭhikasutta*

At Varanasi. Sāriputta said to Mahākoṭṭhita:

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him:

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, a learned noble disciple truly understands the gratification,
the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.134 With Koṭṭhita (2nd) *Dutiyakoṭṭhikasutta*

At Varanasi.

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, an unlearned ordinary person doesn't truly understand the
origin, the ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when
it comes to form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him:

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, a learned noble disciple truly understands the origin, the
ending, the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to
form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.135 With Koṭṭhita (3rd) *Tatiyakoṭṭhikasutta*

The same setting. Sāriputta said to
Mahākoṭṭhita:

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'ignorance'. What is ignorance? And how is an ignorant person defined?"

"Reverend, it's when an unlearned ordinary person doesn't understand
form, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation. They don't understand feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation.

This is called ignorance. And this is how an ignorant person is
defined."

When he said this, Venerable Sāriputta said to him:

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, they speak of this thing called
'knowledge'. What is knowledge? And how is a knowledgeable person
defined?"

"Reverend, it's when a learned noble disciple understands form, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They understand feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.

This is called knowledge. And this is how a knowledgeable person is
defined."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Burning Chaff

### SN 22.136 Burning Chaff *Kukkuḷasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness are
burning chaff.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.137 Impermanence *Aniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire for what is impermanent.

And what is impermanent? Form is impermanent; you should give up desire
for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent; you should give up desire for it.

You should give up desire for what is impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.138 Impermanence (2nd) *Dutiyaaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up greed for what is impermanent. And what
is impermanent?

Form is impermanent; you should give up greed for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent; you should give up greed for it.

You should give up greed for what is impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.139 Impermanence (3rd) *Tatiyaaniccasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire and greed for what is
impermanent. And what is impermanent?

Form is impermanent; you should give up desire and greed for it.

Feeling ...

Perception ...

Choices ...

Consciousness is impermanent; you should give up desire and greed for
it.

You should give up desire and greed for what is impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.140 Suffering *Dukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire for what is suffering. ..."

### SN 22.141 Suffering (2nd) *Dutiyadukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up greed for what is suffering. ..."

### SN 22.142 Suffering (3rd) *Tatiyadukkhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire and greed for what is suffering.
..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.143 Not-Self *Anattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire for what is not-self. ..."

### SN 22.144 Not-Self (2nd) *Dutiyaanattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up greed for what is not-self. ..."

### SN 22.145 Not-Self (3rd) *Tatiyaanattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, you should give up desire and greed for what is not-self.
..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.146 Full of Disillusionment *Nibbidābahulasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a gentleman has gone forth out of faith, this is
what's in line with the teachings. They should live full of
disillusionment for form, feeling, perception, choices, and
consciousness. Living in this way, they completely understand form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Completely
understanding form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness,
they're freed from these things. They're freed from rebirth, old age,
and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.147 Observing Impermanence *Aniccānupassīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a gentleman has gone forth out of faith, this is
what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing
impermanence in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.
... They're freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.148 Observing Suffering *Dukkhānupassīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a gentleman has gone forth out of faith, this is
what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing suffering
in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. ... They're
freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.149 Observing Not-Self *Anattānupassīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when a gentleman has gone forth out of faith, this is
what's in line with the teachings. They should live observing not-self
in form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. ... They're
freed from suffering, I say."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Views

### SN 22.150 In Oneself *Ajjhattasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what, do pleasure and
pain arise in oneself?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form, pleasure and pain arise in
oneself. When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness, pleasure and pain arise in
oneself.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would pleasure and pain arise in oneself?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would pleasure and pain arise in oneself?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.151 This Is Mine *Etaṁmamasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does someone regard things like this: 'This is mine, I am this,
this is my self'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form ...
When consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and
insisting on consciousness, someone regards it like this: 'This is mine,
I am this, this is my self.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would you regard it like this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would you regard it like this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.152 This Is My Self *Soattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the
same. After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and
imperishable'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After death
I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.' When
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of
grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises:
'The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After death I will be
that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the same.
After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and
imperishable'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the same.
After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and
imperishable'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.153 It Might Not Be Mine *Nocamesiyāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I
will not be, and it will not be mine'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will not be,
and it will not be mine.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'I might not be, and it might not be
mine. I will not be, and it will not be mine.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will
not be, and it will not be mine'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will
not be, and it will not be mine'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.154 Wrong View *Micchādiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does wrong view arise?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, wrong
view arises. When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, wrong view arises.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would wrong view arise?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would wrong view arise?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.155 Substantialist View *Sakkāyadiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does substantialist view arise?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form,
substantialist view arises. When feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, substantialist view arises.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would substantialist view arise?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would substantialist view arise?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.156 View of Self *Attānudiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does view of self arise?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, view
of self arises. When feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, view of self arises.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would view of self arise?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would view of self arise?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.157 Insistence *Abhinivesasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, do fetters, insistence, and shackles arise?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form,
fetters, insistence, and shackles arise. When feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and
insisting on consciousness, fetters, insistence, and shackles arise.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would fetters, insistence, and shackles arise?"

"No, sir." ...

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.158 Insistence (2nd) *Dutiyaabhinivesasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, do fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form,
fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise. When feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping
consciousness and insisting on consciousness, fetters, insistence,
shackles, and attachments arise.

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would fetters, insistence, shackles, and attachments arise?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 22.159 With Ānanda *Ānandasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"What do you think, Ānanda? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir." ...

"Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"



