# Linked Discourses on Views

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Stream-Entry

### SN 24.1 Winds *Vātasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar.'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant women don't
give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like
a pillar.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar'?"

"No, sir."

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar'?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.2 This Is Mine *Etaṁmamasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self.' When feeling
... perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping
consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: 'This is
mine, I am this, this is my self.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.3 This Is My Self *Soattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the
same. After death I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and
imperishable'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After death
I will be that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.' When
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of
grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises:
'The self and the cosmos are one and the same. After death I will be
that, permanent, everlasting, eternal, and imperishable.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.4 It Might Not Be Mine *Nocamesiyāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I
will not be, and it will not be mine'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'I might not be, and it might not be mine. I will not be,
and it will not be mine.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'I might not be, and it might not be
mine. I will not be, and it will not be mine.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.5 There's No Meaning in Giving *Natthidinnasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or
offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad deeds. There's no
afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father, or beings that
are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or brahmin who is
rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who describes the afterlife
after realizing it with their own insight. This person is made up of the
four principal states. When they die, the earth in their body merges and
coalesces with the substance of earth. The water in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of water. The fire in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of fire. The air in their body merges
and coalesces with the substance of air. The faculties are transferred
to space. Four men with a bier carry away the corpse. Their footprints
show the way to the cemetery. The bones become bleached. Offerings
dedicated to the gods end in ashes. Giving is a doctrine of morons. When
anyone affirms a positive teaching it's just baseless, false nonsense.
Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their
body breaks up, and don't exist after death'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. ...
Both the foolish and the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their
body breaks up, and don't exist after death.' When feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping
consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: 'There's
no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. ... Both the foolish and
the astute are annihilated and destroyed when their body breaks up, and
don't exist after death.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.6 Acting *Karotosutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The one who acts does nothing wrong when
they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when
they encourage others to do the same. Nothing bad is done when they
kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated
buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. If you were
to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of
flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of that, and no outcome
of evil. If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing,
mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, no
evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were to go along the
north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others
to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no outcome of merit. In
giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is no merit or
outcome of merit'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The one who acts does nothing wrong ... there is no merit
or outcome of merit.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'The one who acts does nothing wrong ...
there is no merit or outcome of merit.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.7 Cause *Hetusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'There is no cause or reason for the
corruption of sentient beings. Sentient beings are corrupted without
cause or reason. There's no cause or reason for the purification of
sentient beings. Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason.
There is no power, no energy, no human strength or vigor. All sentient
beings, all living creatures, all beings, all souls lack control, power,
and energy. Molded by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience
pleasure and pain in the six classes of rebirth'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'There is no cause or reason ... they experience pleasure
and pain in the six classes of rebirth.' When feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and
insisting on consciousness, the view arises: 'There is no cause or
reason ... they experience pleasure and pain in the six classes of
rebirth.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.8 The Extensive View *Mahādiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'There are these seven substances that are
not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as
a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar. They don't move or
deteriorate or obstruct each other. They're unable to cause pleasure,
pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other. What seven? The
substances of earth, water, fire, air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is
the seventh. These seven substances are not made, not derived, not
created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing
firm like a pillar. They don't move or deteriorate or obstruct each
other. They're unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain
to each other. If you chop off someone's head with a sharp sword, you
don't take anyone's life. The sword simply passes through the gap
between the seven substances. There are 1.4 million main wombs, and
6,000, and 600. There are 500 deeds, and five, and three. There are
deeds and half-deeds. There are 62 paths, 62 sub-eons, six classes of
rebirth, and eight stages in a person's life. There are 4,900
Ājīvaka ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 naked
ascetics. There are 2,000 faculties, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dust.
There are seven percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, and
seven knotless embryos. There are seven gods, seven humans, and seven
goblins. There are seven lakes, seven rivers, 700 rivers, seven cliffs,
and 700 cliffs. There are seven dreams and 700 dreams. There are 8.4
million great eons through which the foolish and the astute transmigrate
before making an end of suffering. And here there is no such thing as
this: "By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual
life I shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old
deeds by experiencing their results little by little"---for that cannot
be. Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a
limited period, so there's no increase or decrease, no getting better or
worse. It's like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away
unraveling. In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the
astute will make an end of suffering'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'There are these seven substances that are not made ... the
foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.' When feeling ...
perception ... choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping
consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises: 'There
are these seven substances that are not made ... the foolish and the
astute will make an end of suffering.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.9 The Cosmos is Eternal *Sassatadiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The cosmos is eternal'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The cosmos is eternal.' When feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and
insisting on consciousness, the view arises: 'The cosmos is eternal.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.10 The Cosmos Is Not Eternal *Asassatadiṭṭhisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The cosmos is not eternal'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists ..." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.11 The Cosmos is Finite *Antavāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The cosmos is finite'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.12 The Cosmos is Infinite *Anantavāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The cosmos is infinite'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.13 The Soul and the Body Are Identical *Taṁjīvaṁtaṁsarīraṁsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The soul and the body are identical'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.14 The Soul and the Body Are Different Things *Aññaṁjīvaṁaññaṁsarīraṁsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The soul and the body are different
things'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.15 A Realized One Still Exists *Hotitathāgatosutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'A realized one still exists after death'?"
...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.16 A Realized One No Longer Exists *Nahotitathāgatosutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'A realized one no longer exists after
death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.17 A Realized One Both Still Exists and No Longer Exists *Hoticanacahotitathāgatosutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'A realized one both still exists and no
longer exists after death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.18 A Realized One Neither Still Exists Nor No Longer Exists *Nevahotinanahotitathāgatosutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists after death'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists
after death' ...

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ... "But by not grasping what's impermanent,
suffering, and perishable, would the view arise: 'A realized one neither
still exists nor no longer exists after death'?"

"No, sir."

"That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and
explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no longer
exists after death'?"

"No, sir."

"When a noble disciple has given up doubt in these six cases, and has
given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice
that leads to its cessation, they're called a noble disciple who is a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Second Round

### SN 24.19 Winds *Vātasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant women don't
give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like
a pillar.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar'?"

"No, sir."

"And so, when suffering exists, because of grasping suffering and
insisting on suffering, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't
flow; pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise
nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.' Is feeling ... perception ...
choices ... consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"And so, when suffering exists, because of grasping suffering and
insisting on suffering, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't
flow; pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise
nor set, but stand firm like a pillar.'"


### SN 24.20--35 This Is Mine, Etc. *Etaṁmamādisutta*

*(Tell these in full as in discourses 2 through 17 of the previous
chapter.)*

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.36 Neither Still Exists Nor No Longer Exists *Nevahotinanahotisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists after death'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'A realized one neither still exists nor no longer exists
after death.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'a realized one neither still exists nor
no longer exists after death.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"And so, when suffering exists, because of grasping suffering and
insisting on suffering, the view arises: 'A realized one neither still
exists nor no longer exists after death.'" ...

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"And so, when suffering exists, because of grasping suffering and
insisting on suffering, the view arises: 'A realized one neither still
exists nor no longer exists after death.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.37 The Self is Formed *Rūpīattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self is formed and is healthy after
death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.38 The Self Is Formless *Arūpīattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self is formless and healthy after
death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.39 The Self is Formed and Formless *Rūpīcaarūpīcaattāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"'The self is formed and formless, and is healthy after death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.40 The Self is Neither Formed Nor Formless *Nevarūpīnārūpīattāsutta*

"'The self is neither formed nor formless, and is healthy after death'?"
...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.41 The Self Is Perfectly Happy *Ekantasukhīsutta*

"'The self is perfectly happy, and is free of disease after death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.42 Exclusively Suffering *Ekantadukkhīsutta*

"'The self is exclusively suffering, and is healthy after death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.43 The Self Is Happy and Suffering *Sukhadukkhīsutta*

"'The self is happy and suffering, and is healthy after death'?" ...

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.44 The Self Is Neither Happy Nor Suffering *Adukkhamasukhīsutta*

"'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and is healthy after death'?"
...

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Third Round

### SN 24.45 Winds *Navātasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant women don't
give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like
a pillar.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar'?"

"No, sir."

"And so, what's impermanent is suffering. When this exists, grasping at
this, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar.' Is feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"And so, what's impermanent is suffering. When this exists, grasping at
this, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant
women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but
stand firm like a pillar.'"


### SN 24.46--69 This Is Mine, etc. *Etaṁmamādisutta*

**(Tell in full as in discourses 20 through 43 of the second chapter.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.70 The Self Is Neither Happy Nor Suffering *Adukkhamasukhīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and
healthy after death'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and is healthy
after death.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor
suffering, and healthy after death.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"And so, what's impermanent is suffering. When this exists, grasping at
this, the view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and is
healthy after death.' Is feeling ... perception ... choices ...
consciousness permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would such a view arise?"

"No, sir."

"And so, what's impermanent is suffering. When this exists, grasping at
this, the view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and
healthy after death.'"

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Fourth Round

### SN 24.71 Winds *Navātasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow; pregnant women don't
give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor set, but stand firm like
a pillar.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'Winds don't blow; rivers don't flow;
pregnant women don't give birth; the moon and stars neither rise nor
set, but stand firm like a pillar.' What do you think, mendicants? Is
form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' You should truly see any kind of
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.72--95 This Is Mine, Etc. *Etaṁmamādisutta*

**(Tell in full as in the 24 discourses of the second chapter.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 24.96 The Self Is Neither Happy Nor Suffering *Adukkhamasukhīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, does the view arise: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and
is healthy after death'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the
view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor suffering, and healthy after
death.' When feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness
exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on
consciousness, the view arises: 'The self is neither happy nor
suffering, and is healthy after death.'

What do you think, mendicants? Is form permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"So you should truly see any kind of form at all---past, future, or
present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or superior;
far or near: *all* form---with right understanding: 'This is not mine, I
am not this, this is not my self.' You should truly see any kind of
feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness at all---past,
future, or present; internal or external; solid or subtle; inferior or
superior; far or near: *all* consciousness---with right understanding:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with form,
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness. Being disillusioned,
desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're
freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"



