# Linked Discourses on Arrival at the Truth

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Eye

### SN 25.1 The Eye *Cakkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the eye is impermanent, decaying, and perishing. The ear,
nose, tongue, body, and mind are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. They've arrived at surety in the right way, they've
arrived at the level of the true person, and they've transcended the
level of the untrue person. They can't do any deed which would make them
be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die
without realizing the fruit of stream-entry.

Someone who accepts these teachings after deliberating them with a
degree of wisdom is called a follower of teachings. They've arrived at
surety in the right way, they've arrived at the level of the true
person, and they've transcended the level of the untrue person. They
can't do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die without realizing the fruit of
stream-entry.

Someone who understands and sees these principles is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.2 Sights *Rūpasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, sights are impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Sounds,
smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are impermanent, decaying, and
perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. They've arrived at surety in the right way, they've
arrived at the level of the true person, and they've transcended the
level of the untrue person. They can't do any deed which would make them
be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die
without realizing the fruit of stream-entry.

Someone who accepts these teachings after deliberating them with a
degree of wisdom is called a follower of teachings. They've arrived at
surety in the right way, they've arrived at the level of the true
person, and they've transcended the level of the untrue person. They
can't do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die without realizing the fruit of
stream-entry.

Someone who understands and sees these principles is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.3 Consciousness *Viññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, eye consciousness is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.
Ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body
consciousness, and mind consciousness are impermanent, decaying, and
perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.4 Contact *Samphassasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, eye contact is impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Ear
contact, nose contact, tongue contact, body contact, and mind contact
are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.5 Feeling *Samphassajasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, feeling born of eye contact is impermanent, decaying, and
perishing. Feeling born of ear contact, feeling born of nose contact,
feeling born of tongue contact, feeling born of body contact, and
feeling born of mind contact are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.6 Perception *Rūpasaññāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, perception of sights is impermanent, decaying, and
perishing. Perception of sounds, perception of smells, perception of
tastes, perception of touches, and perception of ideas are impermanent,
decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.7 Intention *Rūpasañcetanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, intention regarding sights is impermanent, decaying, and
perishing. Intention regarding sounds, intention regarding smells,
intention regarding tastes, intention regarding touches, and intentions
regarding ideas are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.8 Craving For Sights *Rūpataṇhāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, craving for sights is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.
Craving for sounds, craving for smells, craving for tastes, craving for
touches, and craving for ideas are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.9 Elements *Pathavīdhātusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, the earth element is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.
The water element, the fire element, the air element, the space element,
and the consciousness element are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 25.10 The Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, form is impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Feeling,
perception, choices, and consciousness are impermanent, decaying, and
perishing.

Someone who has faith and confidence in these teachings is called a
follower by faith. They've arrived at surety in the right way, they've
arrived at the level of the true person, and they've transcended the
level of the untrue person. They can't do any deed which would make them
be reborn in hell, the animal realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die
without realizing the fruit of stream-entry.

Someone who accepts these teachings after deliberating them with a
degree of wisdom is called a follower of teachings. They've arrived at
surety in the right way, they've arrived at the level of the true
person, and they've transcended the level of the untrue person. They
can't do any deed which would make them be reborn in hell, the animal
realm, or the ghost realm. They can't die without realizing the fruit of
stream-entry.

Someone who understands and sees these principles is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."



