# Linked Discourses on Corruptions

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Corruptions

### N 27.1 The Eye *Cakkhusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or
mind is a corruption of the mind. When a mendicant has given up mental
corruption in these six cases, their mind inclines to renunciation. A
mind imbued with renunciation is declared to be capable of directly
knowing anything that can be realized."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.2 Sights *Rūpasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touches, or ideas is a corruption of the mind. When a mendicant has
given up mental corruption in these six cases, their mind inclines to
renunciation. A mind imbued with renunciation is declared to be capable
of directly knowing anything that can be realized."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.3 Consciousness *Viññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for eye consciousness, ear consciousness,
nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness, or mind
consciousness is a corruption of the mind. When a mendicant has given up
mental corruption in these six cases, their mind inclines to
renunciation. A mind imbued with renunciation is declared to be capable
of directly knowing anything that can be realized."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.4 Contact *Samphassasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for eye contact, ear contact, nose
contact, tongue contact, body contact, or mind contact is a corruption
of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.5 Feeling *Samphassajasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for feeling born of eye contact, feeling
born of ear contact, feeling born of nose contact, feeling born of
tongue contact, feeling born of body contact, or feeling born of mind
contact is a defilement of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.6 Perception *Saññāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for perception of sights, perception of
sounds, perception of smells, perception of tastes, perception of
touches, or perception of ideas is a corruption of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.7 Intention *Sañcetanāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for intention regarding sights, intention
regarding sounds, intention regarding smells, intention regarding
tastes, intention regarding touches, or intention regarding ideas is a
corruption of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.8 Craving *Taṇhāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for craving for sights, craving for
sounds, craving for smells, craving for tastes, craving for touches, or
craving for ideas is a corruption of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.9 Elements *Dhātusutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for the earth element, the water element,
the fire element, the air element, the space element, or the
consciousness element is a corruption of the mind. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 27.10 The Aggregates *Khandhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, desire and greed for form, feeling, perception, choices, or
consciousness is a corruption of the mind. When a mendicant has given up
mental corruption in these five cases, their mind inclines to
renunciation. A mind imbued with renunciation is declared to be capable
of directly knowing anything that can be realized."



