# Linked Discourses on Dragons

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Dragons

### SN 29.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, dragons reproduce in these four ways. What four? Dragons
are born from eggs, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. These
are the four ways that dragons reproduce."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.2 Better *Paṇītatarasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, dragons reproduce in these four ways. What four? Dragons
are born from an egg, from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. Of
these, dragons born from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously are
better than those born from an egg. Dragons born from moisture or
spontaneously are better than those born from an egg or from a womb.
Dragons born spontaneously are better than those born from an egg, from
a womb, or from moisture. These are the four ways that dragons
reproduce."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.3 Sabbath *Uposathasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then a mendicant went up
to the Buddha, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why some egg-born dragons
keep the sabbath, having transformed their bodies?"

"Mendicant, it's when some egg-born dragons think: 'In the past we did
both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. When the body broke up,
after death, we were reborn in the company of the egg-born dragons. If
today we do good things by body, speech, and mind, when the body breaks
up, after death, we may be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.
Come, let us do good things by way of body, speech, and mind.' This is
the cause, this is the reason why some egg-born dragons keep the
sabbath, having transformed their bodies."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.4 Sabbath (2nd) *Dutiyauposathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, what is
the cause, what is the reason why some womb-born dragons keep the
sabbath, having transformed their bodies?"

**(Tell all in full.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.5 Sabbath (3rd) *Tatiyauposathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why some moisture-born
dragons keep the sabbath, having transformed their bodies?"

**(Tell all in full.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.6 Sabbath (4th) *Catutthauposathasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why some spontaneously-born
dragons keep the sabbath, having transformed their bodies?"

"Mendicant, it's when some spontaneously-born dragons think: 'In the
past we did both kinds of deeds by body, speech, and mind. When the body
broke up, after death, we were reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born dragons. If today we do good things by body, speech,
and mind, when the body breaks up, after death, we may be reborn in a
good place, a heavenly realm. Come, let us do good things by way of
body, speech, and mind.' This is the cause, this is the reason why some
spontaneously-born dragons keep the sabbath, having transformed their
bodies."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.7 They've Heard *Sutasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born
dragons?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The egg-born dragons are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born
dragons!' When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the
company of the egg-born dragons. This is the cause, this is the reason
why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the
company of the egg-born dragons."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.8 They've Heard (2nd) *Dutiyasutasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born
dragons?"

**(Tell all in full.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.9 They've Heard (3rd) *Tatiyasutasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the moisture-born
dragons?"

**(Tell all in full.)**

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.10 They've Heard (4th) *Catutthasutasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born dragons?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The spontaneously-born dragons are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born dragons!' When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born dragons. This is
the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born
dragons."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.11--20 Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Egg-Born *Aṇḍajadānūpakārasuttadasaka*

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born
dragons?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The egg-born dragons are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born
dragons!' They give food ... drink ... clothing ... a vehicle ... a
garland ... fragrance ... makeup ... a bed ... a house ... a lamp. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the
egg-born dragons. This is the cause, this is the reason why someone,
when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the
egg-born dragons."

<!--pg-->
### SN 29.21--50 Thirty Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Womb-Born, Etc. *Jalābujādidānūpakārasuttattiṁsaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born
dragons ... moisture-born dragons ... spontaneously-born dragons?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The spontaneously-born dragons are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born dragons!' They give food ... drink ... a lamp. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born dragons. This is the cause, this is the reason why
someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the
company of the spontaneously-born dragons."

*(Each set of ten discourses of this series should be told in full the
same way.)*




