# Linked Discourses on Phoenixes

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Phoenixes

### N 30.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, phoenixes reproduce in these four ways. What four?
Phoenixes are born from eggs, from a womb, from moisture, or
spontaneously. These are the four ways that phoenixes reproduce."

<!--pg-->
### N 30.2 They Carry Off *Harantisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, phoenixes reproduce in these four ways. What four?
Phoenixes are born from eggs, from a womb, from moisture, or
spontaneously. These are the four ways that phoenixes reproduce. Of
these, phoenixes born from an egg can only carry off dragons born from
an egg, not those born from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously.
Phoenixes born from a womb can carry off dragons born from an egg or
from a womb, but not those born from moisture or spontaneously.
Phoenixes born from moisture can carry off dragons born from an egg,
from a womb, or from moisture, but not those born spontaneously.
Phoenixes born spontaneously can carry off dragons born from an egg,
from a womb, from moisture, or spontaneously. These are the four ways
that phoenixes reproduce."

<!--pg-->
### N 30.3 Both Kinds of Deeds *Dvayakārīsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The egg-born phoenixes are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes!' When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in
the company of the egg-born phoenixes. This is the cause, this is the
reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in
the company of the egg-born phoenixes."

<!--pg-->
### N 30.4--6 Both Kinds of Deeds (2nd--4th) *Dutiyādidvayakārīsuttattika*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born
phoenixes ..." "... moisture-born phoenixes ..." "... or
spontaneously-born phoenixes?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The spontaneously-born phoenixes are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
spontaneously-born phoenixes!' When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born phoenixes. This
is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in the company of the spontaneously-born
phoenixes."

<!--pg-->
### N 30.7--16 Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become Egg-Born *Aṇḍajadānūpakārasuttadasaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does both kinds of deeds by body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The egg-born phoenixes are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes!' They give food ..." "... drink ..." "... clothing ..." "...
a vehicle ..." "... a garland ..." "... fragrance ..." "... makeup ..."
"... a bed ..." "... a house ..." "... a lamp. When their body breaks
up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes. This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their
body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the egg-born
phoenixes."

<!--pg-->
### N 30.17--46 How Giving Helps to Become Womb-Born, Etc. *Jalābujadānūpakārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the womb-born
phoenixes ... moisture-born phoenixes ... or spontaneously-born
phoenixes?"

**(Tell all in full.)**



