# Linked Discourses on Centaurs

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Centaurs

### N 31.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. ... The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, I will teach you about the gods of the centaur realm.
Listen ...

And what are the gods of the centaur realm? There are gods who live in
fragrant roots, fragrant heartwood, fragrant softwood, fragrant bark,
fragrant shoots, fragrant leaves, fragrant flowers, fragrant fruit,
fragrant sap, and fragrant scents. These are called the gods of the
centaur realm."

<!--pg-->
### N 31.2 Good Conduct *Sucaritasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of the
centaur realm?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods of the centaur realm are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods of the centaur realm!' When their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in the company of the gods of the centaur realm. This is
the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of the centaur realm."

<!--pg-->
### N 31.3 A Giver of Fragrant Roots *Mūlagandhadātāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live in
fragrant roots?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods who live in fragrant roots are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods who live in fragrant roots!' They give gifts of fragrant roots.
When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of
the gods who live in fragrant roots. This is the cause, this is the
reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in
the company of the gods who live in fragrant roots."

<!--pg-->
### N 31.4--12 Nine Discourses On Givers of Fragrant Heartwood, Etc. *Sāragandhādidātāsuttanavaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live in
fragrant heartwood ... softwood ... bark ... sprouts ... leaves ...
flowers ... fruit ... sap ... fragrant scents?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods who live in fragrant heartwood
... fragrant scents are long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They
think: 'If only, when my body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn
in the company of the gods who live in fragrant heartwood ... fragrant
scents!' They give gifts of fragrant heartwood ... fragrant scents. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of the
gods who live in fragrant scents. This is the cause, this is the reason
why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the
company of the gods who live on fragrant scents."

<!--pg-->
### N 31.13--22 Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps Rebirth in Fragrant Roots *Mūlagandhadānūpakārasuttadasaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live in
fragrant roots?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods who live in fragrant roots are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods who live in fragrant roots!' They give food ... drink ... clothing
... a vehicle ... a garland ... fragrance ... makeup ... a bed ... a
house ... a lamp. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in the company of the gods who live in fragrant roots. This is the
cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live in fragrant roots."

<!--pg-->
### N 31.23--112 Ninety Discourses On How Giving Helps Rebirth in Fragrant Heartwood, etc. *Sāragandhādidānūpakārasuttanavutika*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live in
fragrant heartwood ... softwood ... bark ... sprouts ... leaves ...
flowers ... fruit ... sap ... fragrant scents?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods who live in fragrant scents are
long-lived, beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my
body breaks up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the
gods who live in fragrant scents!' They give food ... drink ... clothing
... a vehicle ... a garland ... fragrance ... makeup ... a bed ... a
house ... a lamp. When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in the company of the gods who live in fragrant scents. This is the
cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up, after
death, is reborn in the company of the gods who live on fragrant
scents."



