# Linked Discourses on Cloud Gods

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Gods of the Clouds

### SN 32.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you about the gods of the clouds. Listen ...

And what are the gods of the clouds? There are gods of the cool clouds,
warm clouds, thunder clouds, windy clouds, and rainy clouds. These are
called the gods of the clouds."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.2 Good Conduct *Sucaritasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of the
clouds?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods of the clouds are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of the
clouds!' When their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the
company of the gods of the clouds. This is the cause, this is the reason
why someone, when their body breaks up, after death, is reborn in the
company of the gods of the clouds."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.3--12 Ten Discourses On How Giving Helps to Become a Cool Cloud God *Sītavalāhakadānūpakārasuttadasaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of cool
clouds?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods of cool clouds are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of the
cool clouds!' They give food ... a lamp. When their body breaks up,
after death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of cool clouds.
This is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of cool
clouds."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.13--52 How Giving Helps to Become a Warm Cloud God, Etc. *Uṇhavalāhakadānūpakārasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why someone, when their body
breaks up, after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of warm
clouds ... thunder clouds ... windy clouds ... rainy clouds?"

"Mendicant, it's when someone does good things by way of body, speech,
and mind. And they've heard: 'The gods of rainy clouds are long-lived,
beautiful, and very happy.' They think: 'If only, when my body breaks
up, after death, I would be reborn in the company of the gods of rainy
clouds!' They give food ... a lamp. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of the gods of rainy clouds. This
is the cause, this is the reason why someone, when their body breaks up,
after death, is reborn in the company of the gods of rainy clouds."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.53 Gods of the Cool Clouds *Sītavalāhakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it becomes
cool?"

"Mendicant, there are what are called gods of the cool clouds. Sometimes
they think: 'Why don't we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?' Then, in
accordance with their wish, it becomes cool. This is the cause, this is
the reason why sometimes it becomes cool."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.54 Gods of the Warm Clouds *Uṇhavalāhakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it becomes
warm?"

"Mendicant, there are what are called gods of the warm clouds. Sometimes
they think: 'Why don't we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?' Then, in
accordance with their wish, it becomes warm. This is the cause, this is
the reason why sometimes it becomes warm."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.55 Gods of the Storm Clouds *Abbhavalāhakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it becomes
stormy?"

"Mendicant, there are what are called gods of the storm clouds.
Sometimes they think: 'Why don't we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?'
Then, in accordance with their wish, it becomes stormy. This is the
cause, this is the reason why sometimes it becomes stormy."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.56 Gods of the Windy Clouds *Vātavalāhakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes it becomes
windy?"

"Mendicant, there are what are called gods of the windy clouds.
Sometimes they think: 'Why don't we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?'
Then, in accordance with their wish, it becomes windy. This is the
cause, this is the reason why sometimes it becomes windy."

<!--pg-->
### SN 32.57 Gods of the Rainy Clouds *Vassavalāhakasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Seated to one side, that mendicant said to the Buddha:

"Sir, what is the cause, what is the reason why sometimes the heavens
rain?"

"Mendicant, there are what are called gods of the rainy clouds.
Sometimes they think: 'Why don't we revel in our own kind of enjoyment?'
Then, in accordance with their wish, the heavens rain down. This is the
cause, this is the reason why sometimes the heavens rain."



