# Linked Discourses with Vacchagotta

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter with Vacchagotta

### SN 33.1 Not Knowing Form *Rūpaaññāṇasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery. Then the wanderer
Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged greetings with him. When
the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side
and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? That is: the cosmos is eternal, or
not eternal, or finite, or infinite; the soul and the body are the same
thing, or they are different things; after death, a realized one still
exists, or no longer exists, or both still exists and no longer exists,
or neither still exists nor no longer exists."

"Vaccha, it is because of not knowing form, its origin, its cessation,
and the practice that leads to its cessation that these various
misconceptions arise in the world. This is the cause, this is the
reason."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.2 Not Knowing Feeling *Vedanāaññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? That is: the cosmos is eternal, or
not eternal ... after death, a realized one neither still exists nor no
longer exists."

"Vaccha, it is because of not knowing feeling, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation that these
various misconceptions arise in the world. This is the cause, this is
the reason."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.3 Not Knowing Perception *Saññāaññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? ..."

"Vaccha, it is because of not knowing perception, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.4 Not Knowing Choices *Saṅkhāraaññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? ..."

"Vaccha, it is because of not knowing choices, their origin, their
cessation, and the practice that leads to their cessation ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.5 Not Knowing Consciousness *Viññāṇaaññāṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? ..."

"Vaccha, it is because of not knowing consciousness, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.6--10 Five Discourses on Not Seeing Form, Etc. *Rūpaadassanādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? ..."

"Vaccha, it is because of not seeing form ..." "... feeling ..." "...
perception ..." "... choices ..." "... consciousness, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.11--15 Five Discourses on Not Comprehending Form, Etc. *Rūpaanabhisamayādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not comprehending form ...

feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.16--20 Five Discourses on Not Understanding Form, Etc. *Rūpaananubodhādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not understanding form ...

feeling ...

perception ...

choices ...

consciousness ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.21--25 Five Discourses on Not Penetrating Form, Etc. *Rūpaappaṭivedhādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not penetrating form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.26--30 Five Discourses on Not Distinguishing Form, Etc. *Rūpaasallakkhaṇādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not distinguishing form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.31--35 Five Discourses on Not Detecting Form, Etc. *Rūpaanupalakkhaṇādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not detecting form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.36--40 Five Discourses on Not Differentiating Form, Etc. *Rūpaappaccupalakkhaṇādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not differentiating form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.41--45 Five Discourses on Not Examining Form, Etc. *Rūpaasamapekkhaṇādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not examining form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.46--50 Five Discourses on Not Scrutinizing Form, Etc. *Rūpaappaccupekkhaṇādisuttapañcaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not scrutinizing form ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.51--54 Four Discourses on Not Directly Experiencing Form, Etc. *Rūpaappaccakkhakammādisuttacatukka*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went up to the Buddha and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side, and said to the Buddha:

"What is the cause, worthy Gotama, what is the reason why these various
misconceptions arise in the world? ..."

"Vaccha, it is because of not directly experiencing form ...

feeling ...

perception ...

choices ..."

<!--pg-->
### SN 33.55 Not Directly Experiencing Consciousness *Viññāṇaappaccakkhakammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Vaccha, it is because of not directly experiencing consciousness, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation that
these various misconceptions arise in the world. This is the cause, this
is the reason."



