# Linked Discourses on the Six Sense Fields

**the first fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Impermanence

### N 35.1 The Interior as Impermanent *Ajjhattāniccasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants!"

"Venerable sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"Mendicants, the eye is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

The ear is impermanent. ...

The nose is impermanent. ...

The tongue is impermanent. ...

The body is impermanent. ...

The mind is impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's
suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with
right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is
not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.2 The Interior as Suffering *Ajjhattadukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye is suffering. What's suffering is not-self. And
what's not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are suffering. What's suffering is
not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.3 The Interior as Not-Self *Ajjhattānattasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly
seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.'

The ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not-self. And what's not-self
should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not
mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.4 The Exterior as Impermanent *Bāhirāniccasutta*

"Mendicants, sights are impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering.
What's suffering is not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen
with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this,
this is not my self.'

Sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are impermanent. What's
impermanent is suffering. What's suffering is not-self. And what's
not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This
is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. Being disillusioned, desire
fades away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed,
they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.5 The Exterior as Suffering *Bāhiradukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, sights are suffering. What's suffering is not-self. And
what's not-self should be truly seen with right understanding like this:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.6 The Exterior as Not-Self *Bāhirānattasutta*

"Mendicants, sights are not-self. And what's not-self should be truly
seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.7 The Interior as Impermanent in the Three Times *Ajjhattāniccātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye of the past and future is impermanent, let alone
the present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about the eye of the
past, they don't look forward to enjoying the eye in the future, and
they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
the eye in the present.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind of the past and future is
impermanent, let alone the present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about the mind of
the past, they don't look forward to enjoying the mind in the future,
and they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding the mind in the present."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.8 The Interior as Suffering in the Three Times *Ajjhattadukkhātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye of the past and future is suffering, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about the eye of the
past, they don't look forward to enjoying the eye in the future, and
they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
the eye in the present. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.9 The Interior as Not-Self in the Three Times *Ajjhattānattātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye of the past and future is not-self, let alone the
present.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple doesn't worry about the eye of the
past, they don't look forward to enjoying the eye in the future, and
they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation regarding
the eye in the present. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.10 The Exterior as Impermanent in the Three Times *Bāhirāniccātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, sights of the past and future are impermanent, let alone
the present. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.11 The Exterior as Suffering in the Three Times *Bāhiradukkhātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, sights of the past and future are suffering, let alone the
present. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.12 The Exterior as Not-Self in the Three Times *Bāhirānattātītānāgatasutta*

"Mendicants, sights of the past and future are not-self, let alone the
present. ..."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Pairs

### N 35.13 Before My Awakening (Interior) *Paṭhamapubbesambodhasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification, the
drawback, and the escape when it comes to the eye ... ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... and mind?'

Then it occurred to me: 'The pleasure and happiness that arise from the
eye: this is its gratification. That the eye is impermanent, suffering,
and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing and giving up desire and
greed for the eye: this is its escape.

The pleasure and happiness that arise from the ear ... nose ... tongue
... body ... mind: this is its gratification. That the mind is
impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback. Removing
and giving up desire and greed for the mind: this is its escape.'

As long as I didn't truly understand these six interior sense fields'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I
didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its
gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these six interior sense fields'
gratification, drawback, and escape in this way for what they are, I
announced my supreme perfect awakening in this world with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.14 Before My Awakening (Exterior) *Dutiyapubbesambodhasutta*

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'What's the gratification, the
drawback, and the escape when it comes to sights ... sounds ... smells
... tastes ... touches ... and ideas?' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.15 In Search of Gratification (Interior) *Paṭhamaassādapariyesanasutta*

"Mendicants, I went in search of the eye's gratification, and I found
it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the eye's
gratification. I went in search of the eye's drawback, and I found it.
I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of the eye's drawback. I
went in search of escape from the eye, and I found it. I've seen clearly
with wisdom the full extent of escape from the eye.

I went in search of the ear's ... nose's ... tongue's ... body's ...
mind's gratification, and I found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the
full extent of the mind's gratification. I went in search of the mind's
drawback, and I found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent
of the mind's drawback. I went in search of escape from the mind, and I
found it. I've seen clearly with wisdom the full extent of escape from
the mind.

As long as I didn't truly understand these six interior sense fields'
gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, I didn't announce
my supreme perfect awakening ...

But when I did truly understand ...

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.16 In Search of Gratification (Exterior) *Dutiyaassādapariyesanasutta*

"Mendicants, I went in search of the gratification of sights, and I
found it. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.17 If There Were No Gratification (Interior) *Paṭhamanoceassādasutta*

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the eye, sentient beings
wouldn't be aroused by it. But since there is gratification in the eye,
sentient beings are aroused by it. If the eye had no drawback, sentient
beings wouldn't grow disillusioned with it. But since the eye has a
drawback, sentient beings do grow disillusioned with it. If there were
no escape from the eye, sentient beings wouldn't escape from it. But
since there is an escape from the eye, sentient beings do escape from
it.

If there were no gratification in the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind, sentient beings wouldn't be aroused by it. But since there is
gratification in the mind, sentient beings are aroused by it. If the
mind had no drawback, sentient beings wouldn't grow disillusioned with
it. But since the mind has a drawback, sentient beings do grow
disillusioned with it. If there were no escape from the mind, sentient
beings wouldn't escape from it. But since there is an escape from the
mind, sentient beings do escape from it.

As long as sentient beings don't truly understand these six interior
sense fields' gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are,
they haven't escaped from this world---with its gods,
Māras, and Divinities, this population with its ascetics
and brahmins, its gods and humans---and they don't live detached,
liberated, with a mind free of limits.

But when sentient beings truly understand these six interior sense
fields' gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they've
escaped from this world---with its gods, Māras, and
Divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and
humans---and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.18 If There Were No Gratification (Exterior) *Dutiyanoceassādasutta*

"Mendicants, if there were no gratification in sights, sentient beings
wouldn't be aroused by them. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.19 Taking Pleasure (Interior) *Paṭhamābhinandasutta*

"Mendicants, if you take pleasure in the eye, you take pleasure in
suffering. If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you're not exempt
from suffering.

If you take pleasure in the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind,
you take pleasure in suffering. If you take pleasure in suffering, I say
you're not exempt from suffering.

If you don't take pleasure in the eye, you don't take pleasure in
suffering. If you don't take pleasure in suffering, I say you're exempt
from suffering.

If you don't take pleasure in the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind, you don't take pleasure in suffering. If you don't take pleasure
in suffering, I say you're exempt from suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.20 Taking Pleasure (Exterior) *Dutiyābhinandasutta*

"Mendicants, if you take pleasure in sights, you take pleasure in
suffering. If you take pleasure in suffering, I say you're not exempt
from suffering. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.21 The Arising of Suffering (Interior) *Paṭhamadukkhuppādasutta*

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
the eye is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation,
rebirth, and manifestation of the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
and mind is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of the eye is the cessation of
suffering, the settling of diseases, and the ending of old age and
death. The cessation, settling, and ending of the ear, nose, tongue,
body, and mind is the cessation of suffering, the settling of diseases,
and the ending of old age and death."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.22 The Arising of Suffering (Exterior) *Dutiyadukkhuppādasutta*

"Mendicants, the arising, continuation, rebirth, and manifestation of
sights is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and
the manifestation of old age and death. The arising, continuation,
rebirth, and manifestation of sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas
is the arising of suffering, the continuation of diseases, and the
manifestation of old age and death.

The cessation, settling, and ending of sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touches, and ideas is the cessation of suffering, the settling of
diseases, and the ending of old age and death."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the All

### N 35.23 All *Sabbasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the all. Listen ...

And what is the all? It's just the eye and sights, the ear and sounds,
the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and
the mind and ideas. This is called the all.

Mendicants, suppose someone was to say: 'I'll reject this all and
describe another all.' They'd have no grounds for that, they'd be
stumped by questions, and, in addition, they'd get frustrated. Why is
that? Because they're out of their element."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.24 Giving Up *Pahānasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for giving up the all.
Listen ...

And what is the principle for giving up the all? The eye should be given
up. Sights should be given up. Eye consciousness should be given up. Eye
contact should be given up. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact should also be given up.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind should be given up. Ideas
should be given up. Mind consciousness should be given up. Mind contact
should be given up. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by mind contact should be given up.

This is the principle for giving up the all."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.25 Giving Up By Direct Knowledge and Complete Understanding *Abhiññāpariññāpahānasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for giving up the all by
direct knowledge and complete understanding. Listen ...

And what is the principle for giving up the all by direct knowledge and
complete understanding? The eye should be given up by direct knowledge
and complete understanding. Sights should be given up by direct
knowledge and complete understanding. Eye consciousness should be given
up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Eye contact should be
given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. The painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact
should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind should be given up by
direct knowledge and complete understanding. Ideas should be given up by
direct knowledge and complete understanding. Mind consciousness should
be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. Mind contact
should be given up by direct knowledge and complete understanding. The
painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact should be given up by direct knowledge and complete
understanding.

This is the principle for giving up the all by direct knowledge and
complete understanding."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.26 Without Completely Understanding (1st) *Paṭhamaaparijānanasutta*

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the
all, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. And what is the all, without directly knowing and completely
understanding which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you
can't end suffering?

Without directly knowing and completely understanding the eye, without
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end suffering. Without
directly knowing and completely understanding sights ... eye
consciousness ... eye contact ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact, without dispassion for it and
giving it up, you can't end suffering.

Without directly knowing and completely understanding the ear ... the
nose ... the tongue ... the body ... the mind, without dispassion for it
and giving it up, you can't end suffering. Without directly knowing and
completely understanding ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact
... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering.

This is the all, without directly knowing and completely understanding
which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding the all, having
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering. And what is
the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which, having
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering?

By directly knowing and completely understanding the eye ... the ear ...
the nose ... the tongue ... the body ... the mind, having dispassion for
it and giving it up, you can end suffering. By directly knowing and
completely understanding ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact
... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end
suffering.

This is the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.27 Without Completely Understanding (2nd) *Dutiyaaparijānanasutta*

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the
all, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering. And what is the all, without directly knowing and completely
understanding which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you
can't end suffering?

The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and things knowable by eye
consciousness.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

The mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind
consciousness.

This is the all, without directly knowing and completely understanding
which, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding the all, having
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering. And what is
the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which, having
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering?

The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and things knowable by eye
consciousness.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

The mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable by mind
consciousness.

This is the all, directly knowing and completely understanding which,
having dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.28 Burning *Ādittasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Gayā on
Gayā Head together with a thousand mendicants. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, all is burning. And what is the all that is burning?

The eye is burning. Sights are burning. Eye consciousness is burning.
Eye contact is burning. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by eye contact is also burning. Burning with what?
Burning with the fires of greed, hate, and delusion. Burning with
rebirth, old age, and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

The mind is burning. Ideas are burning. Mind consciousness is burning.
Mind contact is burning. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by mind contact is also burning. Burning with what?
Burning with the fires of greed, hate, and delusion. Burning with
rebirth, old age, and death, with sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress, I say.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of
the thousand mendicants were freed from defilements by not grasping.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.29 Oppressed *Addhabhūtasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding
ground. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, all is oppressed. And what is the all that is oppressed?

The eye is oppressed. Sights are oppressed. Eye consciousness is
oppressed. Eye contact is oppressed. The painful, pleasant, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also oppressed.
Oppressed by what? Oppressed by the fires of greed, hate, and delusion.
Oppressed by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress, I say.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is oppressed. Ideas are
oppressed. Mind consciousness is oppressed. Mind contact is oppressed.
The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact is also oppressed. Oppressed by what? Oppressed by greed,
hate, and delusion. Oppressed by rebirth, old age, and death, by sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, I say.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by mind contact. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire
fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.30 The Practice Fit for Uprooting *Samugghātasāruppasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the practice fit for uprooting all
conceiving. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. ...

And what is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving?

It's when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not
conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not
conceive that 'the eye is mine.' They don't conceive anything to be
sights, they don't conceive it in sights, they don't conceive it as
sights, and they don't conceive that 'sights are mine.' They don't
conceive eye consciousness ... eye contact ... They don't conceive
anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact. They don't conceive it in that, they don't
conceive it as that, and they don't conceive that 'that is mine.'

They don't conceive anything to be the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind ... They don't conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. They don't
conceive it in that, they don't conceive it as that, and they don't
conceive that 'that is mine.'

They don't conceive anything to be all, they don't conceive it in all,
they don't conceive it as all, and they don't conceive that 'all is
mine.' Not conceiving, they don't grasp at anything in the world. Not
grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.31 The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (1st) *Paṭhamasamugghātasappāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that's conducive to uprooting
all conceiving. Listen ...

And what is the practice that's conducive to uprooting all conceiving?
It's when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not
conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not
conceive that 'the eye is mine.' They don't conceive anything to be
sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact. And they don't conceive
anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact. They don't conceive it in that, they don't
conceive it as that, and they don't conceive that 'that is mine.'

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in,
whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be 'mine':
that becomes something else. The world is attached to being, taking
pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

They don't conceive anything to be the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind ... They don't conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. They don't
conceive it in that, they don't conceive it as that, and they don't
conceive that 'that is mine.'

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in,
whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be 'mine':
that becomes something else. The world is attached to being, taking
pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don't
conceive anything to be that, they don't conceive it in that, they don't
conceive it as that, and they don't conceive that 'that is mine.' Not
conceiving, they don't grasp at anything in the world. Not grasping,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is the practice that's conducive to uprooting all conceiving."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.32 The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (2nd) *Dutiyasamugghātasappāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that's conducive to uprooting
all conceiving. Listen ...

And what is the practice that's conducive to uprooting all conceiving?

What do you think, mendicants? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir." ...

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ...

body ... mind ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
They grow disillusioned with the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and
mind contact. And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.' This is the practice that's conducive to uprooting all
conceiving."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Liable to Be Reborn

### N 35.33--42 Ten on Liable to Be Reborn, Etc. *Jātidhammāsutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, all is liable to be reborn. And what is the all that is
liable to be reborn? The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact
are liable to be reborn. And the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact is also liable to be reborn.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are liable to be reborn. And the
pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact is also liable to be reborn.

Seeing this a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned ... They
understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.'"

"Mendicants, all is liable to grow old. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to fall sick. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to die. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to sorrow. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to be corrupted. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to end. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to vanish. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to originate. ..."

"Mendicants, all is liable to cease. ..."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on All is Impermanent

### N 35.43--51 Nine on Impermanence, Etc. *Aniccādisuttanavaka*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, all is impermanent. And what is the all that is
impermanent? The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are
impermanent. And the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent. The painful, pleasant,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also
impermanent.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned ...

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

"Mendicants, all is suffering. ..."

"Mendicants, all is not-self. ..."

"Mendicants, all is to be directly known. ..."

"Mendicants, all is to be completely understood. ..."

"Mendicants, all is to be given up. ..."

"Mendicants, all is to be realized. ..."

"Mendicants, all is to be directly known and completely understood. ..."

"Mendicants, all is troubled. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.52 Disturbed *Upassaṭṭhasutta*

"Mendicants, all is disturbed. And what is the all that is disturbed?
The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are disturbed. And
the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact is also disturbed.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

The mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact are disturbed. And
the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact is also disturbed.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned ...

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

**the second fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Ignorance

### N 35.53 Giving Up Ignorance *Avijjāpahānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so as to give up ignorance and give rise
to knowledge?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact as impermanent, ignorance is given up and knowledge arises.
And also knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact as impermanent, ignorance is
given up and knowledge arises.

Knowing and seeing the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Knowing and seeing the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact
as impermanent, ignorance is given up and knowledge arises. And also
knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by mind contact as impermanent, ignorance is given up and
knowledge arises.

That's how to know and see so as to give up ignorance and give rise to
knowledge."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.54 Giving Up Fetters *Saṁyojanappahānasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the fetters are given up?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye as impermanent, the fetters are
given up ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.55 Uprooting the Fetters *Saṁyojanasamugghātasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the fetters are uprooted?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye as not-self, the fetters are
uprooted ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.56 Giving Up Defilements *Āsavapahānasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the defilements are given up?"
...

### N 35.57 Uprooting Defilements *Āsavasamugghātasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the defilements are uprooted?"
...

<!--pg-->
### N 35.58 Giving Up Tendencies *Anusayapahānasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the underlying tendencies are
given up?" ...

### N 35.59 Uprooting Tendencies *Anusayasamugghātasutta*

"Sir, how does one know and see so that the underlying tendencies are
uprooted?" ...

<!--pg-->
### N 35.60 The Complete Understanding of All Grasping *Sabbupādānapariññāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for the complete
understanding of all grasping. Listen ...

And what is the principle for the complete understanding of all
grasping?

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they are released, they understand: 'I have completely understood
grasping.'

Ear consciousness arises dependent on the ear and sounds. ...

Nose consciousness arises dependent on the nose and smells. ...

Tongue consciousness arises dependent on the tongue and tastes. ...

Body consciousness arises dependent on the body and touches. ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the mind,
ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and feeling. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they are released, they understand: 'I have completely understood
grasping.'

This is the principle for the complete understanding of all grasping."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.61 The Depletion of All Fuel (1st) *Paṭhamasabbupādānapariyādānasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for depleting all fuel.
Listen ...

And what is the principle for depleting all fuel?

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, eye contact, and feeling. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they are released, they understand: 'I have completely depleted
grasping.'

Ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the mind,
ideas, mind consciousness, mind contact, and feeling. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they are released, they understand: 'I have completely depleted
grasping.'

This is the principle for depleting all fuel."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.62 The Depletion of All Fuel (2nd) *Dutiyasabbupādānapariyādānasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for depleting all fuel.
Listen ...

And what is the principle for depleting all fuel?

What do you think, mendicants? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... ideas ... mind
consciousness ... mind contact ... The pleasant, painful, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

They grow disillusioned with the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and
mind contact. And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is the principle for depleting all fuel."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter with Migajāla

### N 35.63 With Migajāla (1st) *Paṭhamamigajālasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Migajāla went up to the Buddha ... and said
to him:

"Sir, they speak of one who lives alone. How is one who lives alone
defined? And how is living with a partner defined?"

"Migajāla, there are sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a
mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives
rise to relishing. When there's relishing there's lust. When there's
lust there is yoking. A mendicant who is fettered by relishing is said
to live with a partner.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves,
welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. When
there's relishing there's lust. When there's lust there is yoking. A
mendicant who is fettered by relishing is said to live with a partner.

A mendicant who lives like this is said to live with a partner, even if
they frequent remote lodgings in the wilderness and the forest that are
quiet and still, far from the madding crowd, remote from human
settlements, and fit for retreat. Why is that? For craving is their
partner, and they haven't given it up. That's why they're said to live
with a partner.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
there's no relishing there's no lust. When there's no lust there's no
yoking. A mendicant who is not fettered by relishing is said to live
alone.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
there's no relishing there's no lust. When there's no lust there's no
yoking.

A mendicant who is not fettered by relishing is said to live alone. A
mendicant who lives like this is said to live alone, even if they live
within a village crowded by monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen; by rulers
and their chief ministers, and monastics of other religions and their
disciples. Why is that? For craving is their partner, and they have
given it up. That's why they're said to live alone."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.64 With Migajāla (2nd) *Dutiyamigajālasutta*

Then Venerable Migajāla went up to the Buddha ... and said
to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Migajāla, there are sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a
mendicant approves, welcomes, and keep clinging to them, this gives rise
to relishing. Relishing is the origin of suffering, I say.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, this gives rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin of
suffering, I say.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, relishing ceases. When relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I
say."

And then Venerable Migajāla approved and agreed with what
the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then Migajāla, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Migajāla became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.65 Samiddhi's Question About Māra *Paṭhamasamiddhimārapañhāsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Venerable Samiddhi
went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'Māra'. How do we
define Māra or what is known as Māra?"

"Samiddhi, where there is the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and things
knowable by eye consciousness, there is Māra or what is
known as Māra.

Where there is the ear, sounds, ear consciousness, and things knowable
by ear consciousness, there is Māra or what is known as
Māra.

Where there is the nose, smells, nose consciousness, and things knowable
by nose consciousness, there is Māra or what is known as
Māra.

Where there is the tongue, tastes, tongue consciousness, and things
knowable by tongue consciousness, there is Māra or what is
known as Māra.

Where there is the body, touches, body consciousness, and things
knowable by body consciousness, there is Māra or what is
known as Māra.

Where there is the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable
by mind consciousness, there is Māra or what is known as
Māra.

Where there is no eye, no sights, no eye consciousness, and no things
knowable by eye consciousness, there is no Māra or what is
known as Māra.

Where there is no ear ... no nose ... no tongue ... no body ...

Where there is no mind, no ideas, no mind consciousness, and no things
knowable by mind consciousness, there is no Māra or what is
known as Māra."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.66 Samiddhi's Question About a Sentient Being *Samiddhisattapañhāsutta*

"Sir, they speak of this thing called a 'sentient being'. How do we
define or describe a sentient being?" ...

<!--pg-->
### N 35.67 Samiddhi's Question About Suffering *Samiddhidukkhapañhāsutta*

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'suffering'. How do we define
suffering or what is known as suffering?" ...

<!--pg-->
### N 35.68 Samiddhi's Question About the World *Samiddhilokapañhāsutta*

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'the world'. How do we define the
world or what is known as the world?"

"Samiddhi, where there is the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and things
knowable by eye consciousness, there is the world or what is known as
the world. Where there is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... Where
there is the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and things knowable by
mind consciousness, there is the world or what is known as the world.

Where there is no eye, no sights, no eye consciousness, and no things
knowable by eye consciousness, there is no world or what is known as the
world. Where there is no ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... Where
there is no mind, no ideas, no mind consciousness, and no things
knowable by mind consciousness, there is no world or what is known as
the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.69 Upasena and the Viper *Upasenaāsīvisasutta*

At one time the venerables Sāriputta and Upasena were
staying near Rājagaha in the Cool Grove, under the Snake's
Hood Grotto. Now at that time a viper fell on Upasena's body, and he
addressed the mendicants, "Come, reverends, lift this body onto a cot
and carry it outside before it's scattered right here like a handful of
hay."

When he said this, Sāriputta said to him, "But we don't see
any impairment in your body or deterioration of your faculties. Yet you
say: 'Come, reverends, lift this body onto a cot and carry it outside
before it's scattered right here like a handful of hay.'"

"Reverend Sāriputta, there may be an impairment in body or
deterioration of faculties for someone who thinks: 'I am the eye' or
'the eye is mine.' Or 'I am the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...' Or
'I am the mind' or 'the mind is mine.'

But I don't think like that. So why would there be an impairment in my
body or deterioration of my faculties?"

"That must be because Venerable Upasena has long ago totally eradicated
I-making, mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit.

That's why it doesn't occur to you: 'I am the eye' or 'the eye is mine.'
Or 'I am the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...' Or 'I am the mind' or
'the mind is mine.'"

Then those mendicants lifted Upasena's body onto a cot and carried it
outside. And his body was scattered right there like a handful of hay.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.70 Upavāna on What is Apparent in the Present Life *Upavāṇasandiṭṭhikasutta*

Then Venerable Upavāna went up to the Buddha ... and said
to him:

"Sir, they speak of 'a teaching apparent in the present life'. In what
way is the teaching apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves?"

"Upavāna, take a mendicant who sees a sight with their
eyes. They experience both the sight and the desire for the sight. There
is desire for sights in them, and they understand that. Since this is
so, this is how the teaching is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

Next, take a mendicant who hears ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

Next, take a mendicant who knows an idea with their mind. They
experience both the idea and the desire for the idea. There is desire
for ideas in them, and they understand that. Since this is so, this is
how the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. They experience the
sight but no desire for the sight. There is no desire for sights in
them, and they understand that. Since this is so, this is how the
teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves.

Next, take a mendicant who hears ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

Next, take a mendicant who knows an idea with their mind. They
experience the idea but no desire for the idea. There is no desire for
ideas in them, and they understand that. Since this is so, this is how
the teaching is apparent in the present life, immediately effective,
inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible people can know it for
themselves."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.71 Six Fields of Contact (1st) *Paṭhamachaphassāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, anyone who doesn't truly understand the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not
completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and
training."

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Here, sir,
I'm lost. For I don't truly understand the six fields of contact's
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape."

"What do you think, mendicant? Do you regard the eye like this: 'This is
mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicant! And regarding the eye, you will truly see clearly with
right wisdom that: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' Just this is the end of suffering.

Do you regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Do you regard the mind like this: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my
self'?"

"No, sir."

"Good, mendicant! And regarding the mind, you will truly see clearly
with right wisdom that: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' Just this is the end of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.72 Six Fields of Contact (2nd) *Dutiyachaphassāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, anyone who doesn't truly understand the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not
completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and
training."

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Here, sir,
I'm lost, truly lost. For I don't truly understand the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape."

"What do you think, mendicant? Do you regard the eye like this: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicant! And regarding the eye, you will truly see clearly with
right wisdom that: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' In this way you will give up the first field of contact, so that
there are no more future lives.

Do you regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Do you regard the mind like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this
is not my self'?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good, mendicant! And regarding the mind, you will truly see clearly
with right wisdom that: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my
self.' In this way you will give up the sixth field of contact, so that
there are no more future lives."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.73 Six Fields of Contact (3rd) *Tatiyachaphassāyatanasutta*

"Mendicants, anyone who doesn't truly understand the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape has not
completed the spiritual journey and is far from this teaching and
training."

When he said this, one of the mendicants said to the Buddha, "Here, sir,
I'm lost, truly lost. For I don't truly understand the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape."

"What do you think, mendicant? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Sick

### N 35.74 Sick (1st) *Paṭhamagilānasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, and said to him, "Sir, in such
and such a monastery there's a mendicant who is junior and not
well-known. He's sick, suffering, gravely ill. Please go to him out of
sympathy."

When the Buddha heard that the mendicant was junior and ill,
understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him. That mendicant
saw the Buddha coming off in the distance and tried to rise on his cot.

The Buddha said to that monk, "It's all right, mendicant, don't get up.
There are some seats spread out, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said to the mendicant, "I hope you're
keeping well, mendicant; I hope you're all right. I hope that your pain
is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and
growing, not fading; its growing is evident, not its fading."

"I hope you don't have any remorse or regret?"

"Indeed, sir, I have no little remorse and regret."

"I hope you have no reason to blame yourself when it comes to ethical
conduct?"

"No sir, I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical
conduct."

"In that case, mendicant, why do you have remorse and regret?"

"Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely
for the sake of ethical purity."

"If that is so, what exactly do you understand to be the purpose of
teaching the Dhamma?"

"I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of
the fading away of greed."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand that I've taught
the Dhamma for the purpose of the fading away of greed. For that is
indeed the purpose. What do you think, mendicant? Is the eye permanent
or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended ... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, that mendicant approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in that mendicant:

"Everything that has a beginning has an end."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.75 Sick (2nd) *Dutiyagilānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, in such
and such a monastery there's a mendicant who is junior and not
well-known. He's sick, suffering, gravely ill. Please go to him out of
sympathy."

When the Buddha heard that the mendicant was junior and ill,
understanding that he was not well-known, he went to him. That mendicant
saw the Buddha coming off in the distance and tried to rise on his cot.

Then the Buddha said to that monk, "It's all right, mendicant, don't get
up. There are some seats spread out, I will sit there."

He sat on the seat spread out and said to the mendicant, "I hope you're
keeping well, mendicant; I hope you're all right. I hope that your pain
is fading, not growing, that its fading is evident, not its growing."

"Sir, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting by. ...

I have no reason to blame myself when it comes to ethical conduct."

"In that case, mendicant, why do you have remorse and regret?"

"Because I understand that the Buddha has not taught the Dhamma merely
for the sake of ethical purity."

"If that is so, what exactly do you understand to be the purpose of
teaching the Dhamma?"

"I understand that the Buddha has taught the Dhamma for the purpose of
complete extinguishment by not grasping."

"Good, good, mendicant! It's good that you understand that I've taught
the Dhamma for the purpose of complete extinguishment by not grasping.
For that is indeed the purpose.

What do you think, mendicant? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... mind consciousness
... mind contact ... The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye
... ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... mind consciousness ...
mind contact ... They grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Being
disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're freed.
When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, that mendicant approved what
the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being spoken, the mind of
that mendicant was freed from defilements by not grasping.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.76 With Rādha on Impermanence *Rādhaaniccasutta*

The Venerable Rādha went up to the Buddha ... and said to
him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've
heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Rādha, you should give up desire for what is impermanent.
And what is impermanent? The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye
contact are impermanent. And the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent. You should
give up desire for it.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent. And the pleasant,
painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is
also impermanent. You should give up desire for it.

You should give up desire for what is impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.77 With Rādha on Suffering *Rādhadukkhasutta*

"Rādha, you should give up desire for what is suffering.
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.78 With Rādha on Not-Self *Rādhaanattasutta*

"Rādha, you should give up desire for what is not-self.
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.79 Giving Up Ignorance (1st) *Paṭhamaavijjāpahānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, is there one thing such that by giving it up a mendicant gives up
ignorance and gives rise to knowledge?"

"There is, mendicant."

"But what is that one thing?"

"Ignorance is one thing such that by giving it up a mendicant gives up
ignorance and gives rise to knowledge."

"But how does a mendicant know and see so as to give up ignorance and
give rise to knowledge?"

"When a mendicant knows and sees the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact as impermanent, ignorance is given up and knowledge arises.
And also knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by eye contact as impermanent, ignorance is
given up and knowledge arises. ...

Knowing and seeing the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact
as impermanent, ignorance is given up and knowledge arises. And also
knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by mind contact as impermanent, ignorance is given up and
knowledge arises.

That's how a mendicant knows and sees so as to give up ignorance and
give rise to knowledge."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.80 Giving Up Ignorance (2nd) *Dutiyaavijjāpahānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, is there
one thing such that by giving it up a mendicant gives up ignorance and
gives rise to knowledge?"

"There is, mendicant."

"But what is that one thing?"

"Ignorance is one thing such that by giving it up a mendicant gives up
ignorance and gives rise to knowledge."

"But how does a mendicant know and see so as to give up ignorance and
give rise to knowledge?"

"Take a mendicant who has heard: 'Nothing is worth insisting on.' When a
mendicant has heard that nothing is worth insisting on, they directly
know all things. Directly knowing all things, they completely understand
all things. Completely understanding all things, they see all signs as
other. They see the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact as
other. And they also see the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by eye contact as other. ...

They see the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact as other.
And they also see the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by mind contact as other. That's how a mendicant knows and
sees so as to give up ignorance and give rise to knowledge."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.81 Several Mendicants *Sambahulabhikkhusutta*

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir,
sometimes wanderers of other religions ask us: 'Reverends, what's the
purpose of leading the spiritual life under the ascetic Gotama?' We
answer them like this: 'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under
the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.'

Answering this way, we trust that we repeat what the Buddha has said,
and don't misrepresent him with an untruth. We trust our explanation is
in line with the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for
rebuttal or criticism."

"Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I've said, and don't
misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the
teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.
For the purpose of leading the spiritual life under me is to completely
understand suffering.

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Reverends, what is
that suffering?' You should answer them: 'Reverends, the eye is
suffering. The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is
to completely understand this. Sights ... Eye consciousness ... Eye
contact ... The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact is also suffering. The purpose of leading the
spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this.

Ear ... Nose ... Tongue ... Body ... Mind ... The pleasant, painful, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also
suffering. The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is
to completely understand this.

This is that suffering. The purpose of leading the spiritual life under
the Buddha is to completely understand this.' When questioned by
wanderers of other religions, that's how you should answer them."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.82 A Question On the World *Lokapañhāsutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'the world'. How is the world
defined?"

"It wears away, mendicant, that's why it's called 'the world'. And what
is wearing away? The eye is wearing away. Sights ... eye consciousness
... eye contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also wearing away.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind ... ideas ... mind
consciousness ... mind contact is wearing away. The painful, pleasant,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also
wearing away.

It wears away, mendicant, that's why it's called 'the world'."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.83 Phagguna's Question *Phaggunapañhāsutta*

And then Venerable Phagguna went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, suppose someone were to describe the Buddhas of the past who have
become fully quenched, cut off proliferation, cut off the track,
finished off the cycle, and transcended all suffering. Does the eye
exist by which they could be described?

Does the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body exist ...? Does the mind exist
by which they could be described?"

"Phagguna, suppose someone were to describe the Buddhas of the past who
have become fully quenched, cut off proliferation, cut off the track,
finished off the cycle, and transcended all suffering. The eye does not
exist by which they could be described.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body does not exist ... The mind does
not exist by which they could be described."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter with Channa

### N 35.84 Liable to Wear Out *Palokadhammasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"Sir, they speak of this thing called 'the world'. How is the world
defined?"

"Ānanda, that which is liable to wear out is called the world in the
training of the Noble One. And what is liable to wear out? The eye is
liable to wear out. Sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact is
liable to wear out. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that
arises conditioned by eye contact is also liable to wear out.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind ... ideas ... mind
consciousness ... mind contact is liable to wear out. The painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is
also liable to wear out.

That which is liable to wear out is called the world in the training of
the Noble One."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.85 The World is Empty *Suññatalokasutta*

And then Venerable Ānanda ... said to the Buddha:

"Sir, they say that 'the world is empty'. What does the saying 'the
world is empty' refer to?"

"Ānanda, they say that 'the world is empty' because it's empty of self
or what belongs to self. And what is empty of self or what belongs to
self? The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are empty of
self or what belongs to self. ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact is also empty of self or what belongs to self. They say
that 'the world is empty' because it's empty of self or what belongs to
self."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.86 A Teaching In Brief *Saṁkhittadhammasutta*

Seated to one side, Venerable Ānanda said to the Buddha:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"What do you think, Ānanda? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir." ...

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.87 With Channa *Channasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Now at that time the venerables Sāriputta,
Mahācunda, and Channa were staying on the Vulture's Peak
Mountain. Now at that time Venerable Channa was sick, suffering, gravely
ill.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Sāriputta came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Mahācunda and said to him,
"Come, Reverend Cunda, let's go to see Venerable Channa and ask about
his illness."

"Yes, reverend," replied Mahācunda.

And then Sāriputta and Mahācunda went to see
Channa and sat down on the seats spread out. Sāriputta said
to Channa: "I hope you're keeping well, Reverend Channa; I hope you're
all right. I hope that your pain is fading, not growing, that its fading
is evident, not its growing."

"Reverend Sāriputta, I'm not keeping well, I'm not getting
by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its growing is
evident, not its fading. The winds piercing my head are so severe, it
feels like a strong man drilling into my head with a sharp point. The
pain in my head is so severe, it feels like a strong man tightening a
tough leather strap around my head. The winds slicing my belly are so
severe, like a deft butcher or their apprentice were slicing open a
cows's belly with a sharp meat cleaver. The burning in my body is so
severe, it feels like two strong men grabbing a weaker man by the arms
to burn and scorch him on a pit of glowing coals. I'm not keeping well,
I'm not getting by. The pain is terrible and growing, not fading; its
growing is evident, not its fading.

Reverend Sāriputta, I will take my life. I don't wish to
live."

"Please don't take your life! Venerable Channa, keep going! We want you
to keep going.

If you don't have any suitable food, we'll find it for you. If you don't
have suitable medicine, we'll find it for you. If you don't have a
capable carer, we'll find one for you.

Please don't take your life! Venerable Channa, keep going! We want you
to keep going."

"Reverend Sāriputta, it's not that I don't have suitable
food; I do have suitable food. It's not that I don't have suitable
medicine; I do have suitable medicine. It's not that I don't have a
capable carer; I do have a capable carer.

Moreover, for a long time now I have served the Teacher with love, not
without love. For it is proper for a disciple to serve the Teacher with
love, not without love. You should remember this: 'The mendicant Channa
will take his life blamelessly.'"

"I'd like to ask Venerable Channa about a certain point, if you'd take
the time to answer."

"Ask, Reverend Sāriputta. When I've heard it I'll know."

"Reverend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye consciousness, and things
knowable by eye consciousness in this way: 'This is mine, I am this,
this is my self'?

Do you regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, mind
consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness in this way:
'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, I regard the eye, eye consciousness,
and things knowable by eye consciousness in this way: 'This is not mine,
I am not this, this is not my self.'

I regard the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, mind
consciousness, and things knowable by mind consciousness in this way:
'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self'."

"Reverend Channa, what have you seen, what have you directly known in
these things that you regard them in this way: 'This is not mine, I am
not this, this is not my self'?"

"Reverend Sāriputta, after seeing cessation, after directly
knowing cessation in these things I regard them in this way: 'This is
not mine, I am not this, this is not my self'."

When he said this, Venerable Mahācunda said to Venerable
Channa, "So, Reverend Channa, you should regularly apply your mind well
to this instruction of the Buddha:

'For the dependent there is agitation. For the independent there's no
agitation. When there's no agitation there is tranquility. When there's
tranquility there's no inclination. When there's no inclination, there's
no coming and going. When there's no coming and going, there's no
passing away and reappearing. When there's no passing away and
reappearing, there's no this world or world beyond or between the two.
Just this is the end of suffering.'"

And when the venerables Sāriputta and
Mahācunda had given Venerable Channa this advice they got
up from their seat and left. Not long after those venerables had left,
Venerable Channa took his life.

Then Sāriputta went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him, "Sir, Venerable Channa has taken his life.
Where has he been reborn in his next life?"

"Sāriputta, didn't the mendicant Channa declare his
blamelessness to you personally?"

"Sir, there is a Vajjian village named Pubbajira. There Channa had
families who were friendly, intimate, and hospitable."

"The mendicant Channa did indeed have such families,
Sāriputta. But this is not enough for me to call someone
'blameworthy'. When someone lays down this body and takes up another
body, I call them 'blameworthy'. But the mendicant Channa did no such
thing.

You should remember this: 'The mendicant Channa take his life
blamelessly.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.88 With Puṇṇa *Puṇṇasutta*

And then Venerable Puṇṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Puṇṇa, there are sights known by the eye, which are
likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a
mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, this gives
rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin of suffering, I say.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... There are ideas
known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant,
sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps
clinging to them, this gives rise to relishing. Relishing is the origin
of suffering, I say.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say. ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, relishing ceases. When
relishing ceases, suffering ceases, I say.

Puṇṇa, now that I've given you this brief advice, what
country will you live in?"

"Sir, there's a country called Sunāparanta; I will live
there."

"The people of Sunāparanta are wild and rough,
Puṇṇa. If they abuse and insult you, what will you think of
them?"

"If they abuse and insult me, I will think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't
hit me with their fists.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's
what I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do hit you with their fists, what will you think of them
then?"

"If they hit me with their fists, I'll think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't
throw stones at me.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what
I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do throw stones at you, what will you think of them then?"

"If they throw stones at me, I'll think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't
beat me with a club.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what
I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do beat you with a club, what will you think of them then?"

"If they beat me with a club, I'll think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't
stab me with a knife.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One. That's what
I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do stab you with a knife, what will you think of them
then?"

"If they stab me with a knife, I'll think: 'These people of
Sunāparanta are gracious, truly gracious, since they don't
take my life with a sharp knife.' That's what I'll think, Blessed One.
That's what I'll think, Holy One."

"But if they do take your life with a sharp knife, what will you think
of them then?"

"If they take my life with a sharp knife, I'll think: 'There are
disciples of the Buddha who looked for something to take their life
because they were horrified, repelled, and disgusted with the body and
with life. And I have found this without looking!' That's what I'll
think, Blessed One. That's what I'll think, Holy One."

"Good, good Puṇṇa! Having such self-control and
peacefulness, you will be quite capable of living in
Sunāparanta. Now, Puṇṇa, go at your
convenience."

And then Puṇṇa welcomed and agreed with the Buddha's words.
He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha,
keeping him on his right. Then he set his lodgings in order and, taking
his bowl and robe, set out for Sunāparanta.

Traveling stage by stage, he arrived at Sunāparanta, and
stayed there. Within that rainy season he confirmed around five hundred
male and five hundred female lay followers. And within that same rainy
season he realized the three knowledges. And within that same rainy
season he became completely extinguished.

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir,
the gentleman named Puṇṇa, who was advised in brief by the
Buddha, has passed away. Where has he been reborn in his next life?"

"Mendicants, Puṇṇa was astute. He practiced in line with
the teachings, and did not trouble me about the teachings.
Puṇṇa has become completely quenched."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.89 With Bāhiya *Bāhiyasutta*

Then Venerable Bāhiya went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"What do you think, Bāhiya? Is the eye permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

And then Venerable Bāhiya approved and agreed with what the
Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully circled
the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then Bāhiya, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Bāhiya became one of the
perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.90 Turbulence (1st) *Paṭhamaejāsutta*

"Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, a boil, a dart. That's why the
Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn
out.'

So let them not conceive anything to be the eye, let them not conceive
it in the eye, let them not conceive it as the eye, let them not
conceive that 'the eye is mine.' Let them not conceive sights ... eye
consciousness ... eye contact ... Let them not conceive anything to be
the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as
that, and let them not conceive that 'that is mine.'

Let them not conceive anything to be the ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind ... ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact ... Let
them not conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Let them not conceive
it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let them not conceive
that 'that is mine.'

Let them not conceive anything to be all, let them not conceive it in
all, let them not conceive it as all, let them not conceive that 'all is
mine'.

Not conceiving, they don't grasp at anything in the world. Not grasping,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.91 Turbulence (2nd) *Dutiyaejāsutta*

"Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, a boil, a dart. That's why the
Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out.

Now, a mendicant might wish: 'May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn
out.'

So let them not conceive anything to be the eye, let them not conceive
it in the eye, let them not conceive it as the eye, let them not
conceive that 'the eye is mine.' Let them not conceive sights ... eye
consciousness ... eye contact ... Let them not conceive anything to be
the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as
that, and let them not conceive that 'that is mine.' For whatever you
conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it
as, and whatever you conceive to be 'mine': that becomes something else.
The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it
becomes something else.

Let them not conceive anything to be the ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ...

Let them not conceive anything to be the mind ... mind consciousness ...
mind contact ... Let them not conceive anything to be the pleasant,
painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact. Let
them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let
them not conceive that 'that is mine.' For whatever you conceive it to
be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and
whatever you conceive to be 'mine': that becomes something else. The
world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it
becomes something else.

As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don't
conceive anything to be that, they don't conceive it in that, they don't
conceive it as that, and they don't conceive that 'that is mine.'

Not conceiving, they don't grasp at anything in the world. Not grasping,
they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become
extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.92 A Duality (1st) *Paṭhamadvayasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a duality. Listen ...

And what is a duality? It's just the eye and sights, the ear and sounds,
the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touches, and
the mind and ideas. This is called a duality.

Mendicants, suppose someone was to say: 'I'll reject this duality and
describe another duality.' They'd have no grounds for that, they'd be
stumped by questions, and, in addition, they'd get frustrated. Why is
that? Because they're out of their element."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.93 A Duality (2nd) *Dutiyadvayasutta*

"Mendicants, consciousness exists dependent on a duality. And what is
that duality?

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The eye is
impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Sights are impermanent, decaying,
and perishing. So this duality is tottering and toppling; it's
impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Eye consciousness is impermanent,
decaying, and perishing. And the causes and reasons that give rise to
eye consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing. But
since eye consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are
impermanent, how could it be permanent?

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things
is called eye contact. Eye contact is also impermanent, decaying, and
perishing. And the causes and reasons that give rise to eye contact are
also impermanent, decaying, and perishing. But since eye contact has
arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be
permanent?

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives. So
these things too are tottering and toppling; they're impermanent,
decaying, and perishing.

Ear consciousness ... Nose consciousness ... Tongue consciousness ...
Body consciousness ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The mind is
impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Ideas are impermanent, decaying,
and perishing. So this duality is tottering and toppling; it's
impermanent, decaying, and perishing. Mind consciousness is impermanent,
decaying, and perishing. And the causes and reasons that give rise to
mind consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing. But
since mind consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are
impermanent, how could it be permanent?

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things
is called mind contact. Mind contact is also impermanent, decaying, and
perishing. And the causes and reasons that give rise to mind contact are
also impermanent, decaying, and perishing. But since mind contact has
arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be
permanent?

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives. So
these things too are tottering and toppling; they're impermanent,
decaying, and perishing.

This is how consciousness exists dependent on a duality."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Sixes

### N 35.94 Untamed, Unguarded *Adantaaguttasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these six fields of contact bring suffering when they're
untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained. What six?

The field of eye contact brings suffering when it's untamed, unguarded,
unprotected, and unrestrained.

The field of ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact ... body
contact ...

The field of mind contact brings suffering when it's untamed, unguarded,
unprotected, and unrestrained.

These six fields of contact bring suffering when they're untamed,
unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained.

These six fields of contact bring happiness when they're well tamed,
well guarded, well protected, and well restrained. What six?

The field of eye contact brings happiness when it's well tamed, well
guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

The field of ear contact ... nose contact ... tongue contact ... body
contact ...

The field of mind contact brings happiness when it's well tamed, well
guarded, well protected, and well restrained.

These six fields of contact bring happiness when they're well tamed,
well guarded, well protected, and well restrained."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Mendicants, it's just the six fields of contact\
> that lead the unrestrained to suffering.\
> Those who understand how to restrain them\
> live with faith as partner, not festering.
>
> When you've seen pleasant sights\
> and unpleasant ones, too,\
> get rid of all manner of desire for the pleasant,\
> without hating what you don't like.
>
> When you've heard sounds both liked and disliked,\
> don't fall under the thrall of sounds you like,\
> get rid of hate for the unliked,\
> and don't hurt your mind\
> － by thinking of what you don't like.
>
> When you've smelled a pleasant, fragrant scent,\
> and one that's foul and unpleasant,\
> get rid of repulsion for the unpleasant,\
> while not yielding to desire for the pleasant.
>
> When you've enjoyed a sweet, delicious taste,\
> and sometimes those that are bitter,\
> don't be attached to enjoying sweet tastes,\
> and don't despise the bitter.
>
> Don't be intoxicated by a pleasant touch,\
> and don't tremble at a painful touch.\
> Look with equanimity at the duality\
> － of pleasant and painful contacts,\
> without favoring or opposing anything.
>
> People generally let their perceptions proliferate;\
> perceiving and proliferating, they are attracted.\
> When you've expelled all thoughts of domestic life,\
> wander intent on renunciation.
>
> When the mind is well developed like this\
> － regarding the six,\
> it doesn't waver at contacts at all.\
> Mendicants, those who have mastered greed and hate\
> go beyond birth and death."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.95 Māluṅkyaputta *Mālukyaputtasutta*

Then Venerable Māluṅkyaputta went up to the Buddha ... and
asked him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"Well now, Māluṅkyaputta, what are we to say to the young
monks, when even an old man like you, elderly and senior, advanced in
years, having reached the final stage of life, asks for brief advice?"

"Sir, even though I'm an old man, elderly and senior, may the Buddha
please teach me Dhamma in brief! May the Holy one please teach me in
brief! Hopefully I can understand the meaning of what the Buddha says.
Hopefully I can be an heir of the Buddha's teaching!"

"What do you think, Māluṅkyaputta? Do you have any desire
or greed or fondness for sights known by the eye that you haven't seen,
you've never seen before, you don't see, and you don't think would be
seen?"

"No, sir."

"Do you have any desire or greed or affection for sounds known by the
ear ...

smells known by the nose ...

tastes known by the tongue ...

touches known by the body ...

ideas known by the mind that you haven't known, you've never known
before, you don't know, and you don't think would be known?"

"No, sir."

"In that case, when it comes to things that are able to be seen, heard,
thought, and known: in the seen will be merely the seen; in the heard
will be merely the heard; in the thought will be merely the thought; in
the known will be merely the known. When this is the case, you won't be
'by that'. When you're not 'by that', you won't be 'in that'. When
you're not 'in that', you won't be in this world or the world beyond or
in between the two. Just this is the end of suffering."

"This is how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement:

> 'When you see a sight, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from sights.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> When you hear a sound, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from sounds.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> When you smell an odor, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from smells.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> When you enjoy a taste, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from tastes.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> When you sense a touch, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from touches.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> When you know an idea, mindfulness is lost\
> as you focus on a pleasant feature.\
> Experiencing it with a mind full of desire,\
> you keep clinging to it.
>
> Many feelings grow\
> arising from ideas.\
> The mind is damaged\
> by covetousness and cruelty.\
> Heaping up suffering like this,\
> you're said to be far from extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for sights\
> when you see a sight with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you see a sight\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for sounds\
> when you hear a sound with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you hear a sound\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for odors\
> when you smell an odor with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you smell an odor\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for tastes\
> when you enjoy a taste with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you savor a taste\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for touches\
> when you sense a touch with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you sense a touch\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.
>
> There's no desire for ideas\
> when you know an idea with mindfulness.\
> Experiencing it with a mind free of desire,\
> you don't keep clinging to it.
>
> Even as you know an idea\
> and get familiar with how it feels,\
> you wear away, you don't heap up:\
> that's how to live mindfully.\
> Eroding suffering like this,\
> you're said to be in the presence of extinguishment.'

That's how I understand the detailed meaning of the Buddha's brief
statement."

"Good, good, Māluṅkyaputta! It's good that you understand
the detailed meaning of what I've said in brief like this." And he
repeated the verses in full.

"This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what I said in
brief."

And then Venerable Māluṅkyaputta approved and agreed with
what the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving. Then
Māluṅkyaputta, living alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute, soon realized the supreme end of the spiritual path in this
very life. He lived having achieved with his own insight the goal for
which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.

He understood: "Rebirth is ended; the spiritual journey has been
completed; what had to be done has been done; there is nothing further
for this place." And Venerable Māluṅkyaputta became one of
the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.96 Liable to Decline *Parihānadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you who is liable to decline, who is not
liable to decline, and the six fields of mastery. Listen ...

And how is someone liable to decline? When a mendicant sees a sight with
the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to
fetters. Suppose that mendicant tolerates them and doesn't give them up,
get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them. They should
understand: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the
Buddha calls decline.'

Furthermore, when a mendicant hears a sound ... smells an odor ...
tastes a flavor ... feels a touch ... knows an idea with the mind, bad,
unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. If
that mendicant tolerates them and doesn't give them up, get rid of them,
eliminate them, and obliterate them, they should understand: 'My
skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls
decline.' That's how someone is liable to decline.

And how is someone not liable to decline? When a mendicant sees a sight
with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts
prone to fetters. Suppose that mendicant doesn't tolerate them but gives
them up, gets rid of them, eliminates them, and obliterates them. They
should understand: 'My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is
what the Buddha calls non-decline.'

Furthermore, when a mendicant hears a sound ... smells an odor ...
tastes a flavor ... feels a touch ... knows an idea with the mind, bad,
unskillful phenomena arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters.
Suppose that mendicant doesn't tolerate them but gives them up, gets rid
of them, eliminates them, and obliterates them. They should understand:
'My skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha
calls non-decline.' That's how someone is not liable to decline.

And what are the six fields of mastery? When a mendicant sees a sight
with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena don't arise: memories and
thoughts prone to fetters. They should understand: 'This sense field has
been mastered. For this is what the Buddha calls a field of mastery.'
... Furthermore, when a mendicant knows an idea with the mind, bad,
unskillful phenomena don't arise: memories and thoughts prone to
fetters. They should understand: 'This sense field has been mastered.
For this is what the Buddha calls a field of mastery.' These are the six
fields of mastery."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.97 One Who Lives Negligently *Pamādavihārīsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you who lives negligently and who lives
diligently. Listen ...

And how does someone live negligently?

When you live with the eye faculty unrestrained, your mind becomes
polluted when it comes to sights known by the eye. When the mind is
polluted, there's no joy. When there's no joy, there's no rapture. When
there's no rapture, there's no tranquility. When there's no tranquility,
there's suffering. When one is suffering, the mind does not become
immersed in samādhi. When the mind is not immersed in
samādhi, principles do not become clear. Because principles
have not become clear, you're considered to live negligently.

When you live with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind faculty
unrestrained, your mind becomes polluted when it comes to ideas known by
the mind. When the mind is polluted, there's no joy. When there's no
joy, there's no rapture. When there's no rapture, there's no
tranquility. When there's no tranquility, there's suffering. When one is
suffering, the mind does not become immersed in samādhi.
When the mind is not immersed in samādhi, principles do not
become clear. Because principles have not become clear, you're
considered to live negligently.

That's how someone lives negligently.

And how does someone live diligently?

When you live with the eye faculty restrained, your mind doesn't become
polluted when it comes to sights known by the eye. When the mind isn't
polluted, joy springs up. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the
mind is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, one feels bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. When the mind is immersed in
samādhi, principles become clear. Because principles have
become clear, you're considered to live diligently.

When you live with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind faculty
restrained, your mind doesn't become polluted when it comes to ideas
known by the mind. When the mind isn't polluted, joy springs up. Being
joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind is full of rapture, the body
becomes tranquil. When the body is tranquil, one feels bliss. And when
blissful, the mind becomes immersed in samādhi. When the
mind is immersed in samādhi, principles become clear.
Because principles have become clear, you're considered to live
diligently.

That's how someone lives diligently."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.98 Restraint *Saṁvarasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you who is restrained and who is unrestrained.
Listen ...

And how is someone unrestrained?

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves,
welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they should understand: 'My
skillful qualities are declining. For this is what the Buddha calls
decline.'

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, they should understand: 'My skillful qualities are declining. For
this is what the Buddha calls decline.'

This is how someone is unrestrained.

And how is someone restrained?

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they should understand: 'My
skillful qualities are not declining. For this is what the Buddha calls
non-decline.'

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, they should understand: 'My skillful qualities are not
declining. For this is what the Buddha calls non-decline.'

This is how someone is restrained."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.99 Immersion *Samādhisutta*

"Mendicants, develop immersion. A mendicant who has immersion truly
understands. What do they truly understand?

They truly understand that the eye is impermanent. They truly understand
that sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ... the pleasant,
painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is
impermanent. ...

They truly understand that the mind is impermanent. They truly
understand that ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact ... the
pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact is impermanent.

Mendicants, develop immersion. A mendicant who has immersion truly
understands."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.100 Retreat *Paṭisallānasutta*

"Mendicants, meditate in retreat. A mendicant in retreat truly
understands. What do they truly understand?

They truly understand that the eye is impermanent. They truly understand
that sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ... the pleasant,
painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is
impermanent.

Mendicants, meditate in retreat. A mendicant in retreat truly
understands."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.101 It's Not Yours (1st) *Paṭhamanatumhākasutta*

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours?

The eye isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare
and happiness. Sights ... Eye consciousness ... Eye contact ... The
pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare
and happiness.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

The mind isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare
and happiness. Ideas ... Mind consciousness ... Mind contact ... The
pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare
and happiness.

Suppose a person was to carry off the grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves in this Jeta's Grove, or burn them, or do what they want with
them. Would you think: 'This person is carrying us off, burning us, or
doing what they want with us'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because to us that's neither self nor belonging
to self."

"In the same way, the eye isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be
for your welfare and happiness. ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.102 It's Not Yours (2nd) *Dutiyanatumhākasutta*

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours?

The eye isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare
and happiness. Sights ... Eye consciousness ... Eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness.

Give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your welfare and
happiness."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.103 About Uddaka *Udakasutta*

"Mendicants, Uddaka son of Rāma, used to say:

> 'Herewith! Absolutely the knowledge master!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the conqueror of all!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the undug\
> boil's root is dug out!'

Even though Uddaka son of Rāma was no knowledge master, he
said 'I'm a knowledge master.' Though he was no conqueror of all, he
said 'I'm conqueror of all.' And though the boil's root was not dug out,
he said 'I've dug out the boil's root.'

Here's how a mendicant would rightly say:

> 'Herewith! Absolutely the knowledge master!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the conqueror of all!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the undug\
> boil's root is dug out!'

And how is someone a knowledge master? It's when a mendicant truly
understands the six fields of contact's origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape. That's how a mendicant is a knowledge master.

And how is a mendicant a conqueror of all? It's when a mendicant comes
to be freed by not grasping after truly understanding the six fields of
contact's origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. That's
how a mendicant is a conqueror of all.

And how has a mendicant dug out the undug boil's root? 'Boil' is a term
for this body made up of the four principal states, produced by mother
and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable to impermanence, to
wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and destruction. 'Boil's root'
is a term for craving. It's when a mendicant has given up craving, cut
it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, obliterated it, so it's
unable to arise in the future. That's how a mendicant has dug out the
undug boil's root.

Uddaka son of Rāma used to say:

> 'Herewith! Absolutely the knowledge master!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the conqueror of all!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the undug\
> boil's root is dug out!'

Even though Uddaka son of Rāma was no knowledge master, he
said 'I'm a knowledge master.' Though he was no conqueror of all, he
said 'I'm conqueror of all.' And though the boil's root was not dug out,
he said 'I've dug out the boil's root.'

But that's how a mendicant would rightly say:

> 'Herewith! Absolutely the knowledge master!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the conqueror of all!\
> Herewith! Absolutely the undug\
> boil's root is dug out!'"

**the third fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Sanctuary

### N 35.104 Sanctuary from the Yoke *Yogakkhemisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching, an
explanation of one who has found sanctuary from the yoke. Listen ...

And what is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has
found sanctuary from the yoke?

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. The Realized One has given
these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and
obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. He teaches
yoking oneself to meditation for giving them up. That's why the Realized
One is called one who has found sanctuary from the yoke. ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. The Realized One has given
these up, cut them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, and
obliterated them, so they are unable to arise in the future. He teaches
yoking oneself to meditation for giving them up. That's why the Realized
One is called one who has found sanctuary from the yoke.

This is an exposition of the teaching, an explanation of one who has
found sanctuary from the yoke."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.105 Because of Grasping *Upādāyasutta*

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what, do pleasure and
pain arise in oneself?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"Mendicants, when there's an eye, because of grasping the eye, pleasure
and pain arise in oneself. ... When there's a mind, because of grasping
the mind, pleasure and pain arise in oneself.

What do you think, mendicants? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would pleasure and pain arise in oneself?"

"No, sir." ...

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would pleasure and pain arise in oneself?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.106 The Origin of Suffering *Dukkhasamudayasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the origin and ending of suffering. Listen
...

And what, mendicants, is the origin of suffering? Eye consciousness
arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is
contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for
craving. This is the origin of suffering ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. This is the origin of suffering.

And what is the ending of suffering? Eye consciousness arises dependent
on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a
condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that
craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the ending of
suffering. ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with
nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.
This is the ending of suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.107 The Origin of the World *Lokasamudayasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the origin and ending of the world. Listen
...

And what, mendicants, is the origin of the world? Eye consciousness
arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is
contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for
craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping is a condition
for continued existence. Continued existence is a condition for rebirth.
Rebirth is a condition for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
sadness, and distress to come to be. This is the origin of the world.
...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping
is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a
condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. This is
the origin of the world.

And what is the ending of the world? Eye consciousness arises dependent
on the eye and sights. The meeting of the three is contact. Contact is a
condition for feeling. Feeling is a condition for craving. When that
craving fades away and ceases with nothing left over, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases. When continued
existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When rebirth ceases, old age and
death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease. That is
how this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the ending of the
world. ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with
nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases ... That is how
this entire mass of suffering ceases. This is the ending of the world."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.108 I'm Better *Seyyohamasmisutta*

"Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on
what, do people think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"When there's an eye, because of grasping the eye and insisting on the
eye, people think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'. ...

When there's a mind, because of grasping the mind and insisting on the
mind, people think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'.

What do you think, mendicants? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would people think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'?"

"No, sir." ...

"Is the mind permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But by not grasping what's impermanent, suffering, and perishable,
would people think 'I'm better' or 'I'm equal' or 'I'm worse'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.109 Things Prone to Being Fettered *Saṁyojaniyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that are prone to being
fettered, and the fetter. Listen ...

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the
fetter? The eye is something that's prone to being fettered. The desire
and greed for it is the fetter.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is something that's prone
to being fettered. The desire and greed for it is the fetter. These are
called the things that are prone to being fettered, and this is the
fetter."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.110 Things Prone to Fuel Grasping *Upādāniyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that fuel grasping, and the
grasping. Listen ...

What are the things that fuel grasping? And what is the grasping? The
eye is something that's prone to fuel grasping. The desire and greed for
it is the grasping.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is something that's prone
to fuel grasping. The desire and greed for it is the grasping. These are
called the things that fuel grasping, and this is the grasping."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.111 Complete Understanding of the Interior *Ajjhattikāyatanaparijānanasutta*

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding the
eye, without dispassion for it and giving it up, you can't end
suffering.

Without directly knowing and completely understanding the ear ... nose
... tongue ... body ... mind, without dispassion for it and giving it
up, you can't end suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding the eye, having
dispassion for it and giving it up, you can end suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding the ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind, having dispassion for it and giving it up, you
can end suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.112 Complete Understanding of the Exterior *Bāhirāyatanaparijānanasutta*

"Mendicants, without directly knowing and completely understanding
sights ... sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas, without
dispassion for them and giving them up, you can't end suffering.

By directly knowing and completely understanding sights ... sounds ...
smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas, having dispassion for them and
giving them up, you can end suffering."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.113 Listening In *Upassutisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying at Ñātika in the brick
house. Then while the Buddha was in private retreat he spoke this
exposition of the teaching:

"Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping
is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a
condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is
how this entire mass of suffering originates.

Ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. Craving is a condition for grasping. Grasping
is a condition for continued existence. Continued existence is a
condition for rebirth. Rebirth is a condition for old age and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be. That is
how this entire mass of suffering originates.

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights. The meeting of
the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is a
condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with
nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases, continued
existence ceases. When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases. When
rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness,
and distress cease. That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

Ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas. The meeting
of the three is contact. Contact is a condition for feeling. Feeling is
a condition for craving. When that craving fades away and ceases with
nothing left over, grasping ceases. When grasping ceases ... That is how
this entire mass of suffering ceases."

Now at that time a certain monk was standing listening in on the Buddha.
The Buddha saw him and said, "Monk, did you hear that exposition of the
teaching?"

"Yes, sir."

"Learn that exposition of the teaching, memorize it, and remember it.
That exposition of the teaching is beneficial and relates to the
fundamentals of the spiritual life."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the World and the Kinds of Sensual Stimulation

### N 35.114 Māra's Snare (1st) *Paṭhamamārapāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they're called a
mendicant trapped in Māra's lair, fallen under
Māra's sway, and caught in Māra's snare.
They're bound by Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One can do
with them what he wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves,
welcomes, and keep clinging to them, they're called a mendicant trapped
in Māra's lair, fallen under Māra's sway, and
caught in Māra's snare. They're bound by Māra,
and the Wicked One can do with them what he wants.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they're called a mendicant
not trapped in Māra's lair, not fallen under
Māra's sway, and released from Māra's snare.
They're free from Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One cannot
do with them what he wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...

There are ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they're called a mendicant
not trapped in Māra's lair, not fallen under
Māra's sway, and released from Māra's snare.
They're free from Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One cannot
do with them what he wants."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.115 Māra's Snare (2nd) *Dutiyamārapāsasutta*

"Mendicants, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they're called a
mendicant who is bound in sights known by the eye. They're trapped in
Māra's lair, fallen under Māra's sway, and
caught in Māra's snare. They're bound by
Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One can do with them what he
wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, they're called a mendicant who is bound in ideas known by the
mind. They're trapped in Māra's lair, fallen under
Māra's sway, and caught in Māra's snare.
They're bound by Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One can do
with them what he wants.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they're called a mendicant
who is freed from sights known by the eye. They're not trapped in
Māra's lair, not fallen under Māra's sway, and
released from Māra's snare. They're free from
Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One cannot do with them what
he wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, they're called a mendicant who is freed from ideas known by the
mind. They're not trapped in Māra's lair, not fallen under
Māra's sway, and released from Māra's snare.
They're free from Māra's bonds, and the Wicked One cannot
do with them what he wants."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.116 Traveling to the End of the World *Lokantagamanasutta*

"Mendicants, I say it's not possible to know or see or reach the end of
the world by traveling. But I also say there's no making an end of
suffering without reaching the end of the world."

When he had spoken, the Blessed One got up from his seat and entered his
dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary recital, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. ... Who can explain in detail the
meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought, "This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the
Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable
of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary recital given
by the Buddha. Let's go to him, and ask him about this matter."

Then those mendicants went to Ānanda and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side. They told him what had happened, and said, "May Venerable
Ānanda please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. And while
wandering in search of heartwood he'd come across a large tree standing
with heartwood. But he'd pass over the roots and trunk, imagining that
the heartwood should be sought in the branches and leaves.

Such is the consequence for the venerables. Though you were face to face
with the Buddha, you overlooked him, imagining that you should ask me
about this matter. For he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He
is vision, he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is
the manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. You should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer."

"Certainly he is the Buddha, the one who knows and sees. He is vision,
he is knowledge, he is the manifestation of principle, he is the
manifestation of divinity. He is the teacher, the proclaimer, the
elucidator of meaning, the bestower of freedom from death, the lord of
truth, the Realized One. That was the time to approach the Buddha and
ask about this matter. We should have remembered it in line with the
Buddha's answer.

Still, Venerable Ānanda is praised by the Buddha and esteemed by his
sensible spiritual companions. You are capable of explaining in detail
the meaning of this brief summary recital given by the Buddha. Please
explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

'Mendicants, I say it's not possible to know or see or reach the end of
the world by traveling. But I also say there's no making an end of
suffering without reaching the end of the world.'

This is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary recital.

Whatever in the world through which you perceive the world and conceive
the world is called the world in the training of the Noble One. And
through what in the world do you perceive the world and conceive the
world?

Through the eye in the world you perceive the world and conceive the
world. Through the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind in the
world you perceive the world and conceive the world.

Whatever in the world through which you perceive the world and conceive
the world is called the world in the training of the Noble One.

When the Buddha gave this brief summary recital, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

'Mendicants, I say it's not possible to know or see or reach the end of
the world by traveling. But I also say there's no making an end of
suffering without reaching the end of the world.'

That is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary.

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their
seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him
what had happened.

Then they said, "And Ānanda explained the meaning to us in this manner,
with these words and phrases."

"Mendicants, Ānanda is astute, he has great wisdom. If you came to me
and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as
Ānanda. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember it."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.117 The Kinds of Sensual Stimulation *Kāmaguṇasutta*

"Mendicants, before my awakening---when I was still unawakened but
intent on awakening---I thought: 'My mind might often stray towards the
five kinds of sensual stimulation that I formerly experienced---which
have passed, ceased, and perished---or to those in the present, or in
the future a little.'

Then it occurred to me: 'In my own way I should practice diligence,
mindfulness, and protecting the mind regarding the five kinds of sensual
stimulation that I formerly experienced---which have passed, ceased, and
perished.'

So, mendicants, your minds might also often stray towards the five kinds
of sensual stimulation that you formerly experienced---which have
passed, ceased, and perished---or to those in the present, or in the
future a little. So in your own way you should practice diligence,
mindfulness, and protecting the mind regarding the five kinds of sensual
stimulation that you formerly experienced---which have passed, ceased,
and perished.

So you should understand that dimension where the eye ceases and
perception of sights fades away. You should understand that dimension
where the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ceases and
perception of ideas fades away."

When he had spoken, the Blessed One got up from his seat and entered his
dwelling.

Soon after the Buddha left, those mendicants considered, "The Buddha
gave this brief summary, then entered his dwelling without explaining
the meaning in detail. ... Who can explain in detail the meaning of this
brief summary given by the Buddha?"

Then those mendicants thought, "This Venerable Ānanda is praised by the
Buddha and esteemed by his sensible spiritual companions. He is capable
of explaining in detail the meaning of this brief summary given by the
Buddha. Let's go to him, and ask him about this matter."

Then those mendicants went to Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, they sat down to
one side. They told him what had happened, and said, "May Venerable
Ānanda please explain this."

"Reverends, suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. ..."

"Please explain this, if it's no trouble."

"Then listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Ānanda said this:

"Reverends, the Buddha gave this brief summary, then entered his
dwelling without explaining the meaning in detail:

'So you should understand that dimension where the eye ceases and
perception of sights fades away. You should understand that dimension
where the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ceases and
perception of ideas fades away.'

And this is how I understand the detailed meaning of this summary.

The Buddha was referring to the cessation of the six sense fields when
he said: 'So you should understand that dimension where the eye ceases
and perception of sights fades away. You should understand that
dimension where the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ceases and
perception of ideas fades away.'

The Buddha gave this brief summary, then entered his dwelling without
explaining the meaning in detail. And this is how I understand the
detailed meaning of this summary.

If you wish, you may go to the Buddha and ask him about this. You should
remember it in line with the Buddha's answer."

"Yes, reverend," replied those mendicants. Then they rose from their
seats and went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him
what had happened.

Then they said, "And Ānanda explained the meaning to us in this manner,
with these words and phrases."

"Mendicants, Ānanda is astute, he has great wisdom. If you came to me
and asked this question, I would answer it in exactly the same way as
Ānanda. That is what it means, and that's how you should remember it."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.118 The Question of Sakka *Sakkapañhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. And then Sakka, lord of gods, went up to the
Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are
not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause, what is the
reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this very
life?"

"Lord of gods, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness has
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant with fuel for
grasping does not become extinguished.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, their consciousness has that as support and fuel for grasping. A
mendicant with fuel for grasping does not become extinguished. That's
the cause, that's the reason why some sentient beings are not fully
extinguished in this very life.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn't
have that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant free of grasping
becomes extinguished.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, their consciousness doesn't have that as support and fuel for
grasping. A mendicant free of grasping becomes extinguished. That's the
cause, that's the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished
in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.119 The Question of Pañcasikha *Pañcasikhasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain. And then the centaur Pañcasikha
went up to the Buddha, bowed, stood to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are
not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause, sir, what
is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this
very life?"

"Pañcasikha, there are sights known by the eye ...

ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and
keeps clinging to them, their consciousness has that as support and fuel
for grasping. A mendicant with fuel for grasping does not become
extinguished. That's the cause, that's the reason why some sentient
beings are not fully extinguished in this very life.

There are sights known by the eye ...

ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve,
welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn't have
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant free of grasping
becomes extinguished. That's the cause, that's the reason why some
sentient beings are fully extinguished in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.120 Sāriputta and the Protégé *Sāriputtasaddhivihārikasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta was staying near
Sāvatthī in Jeta's Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's
monastery. Then a certain mendicant went up to Venerable
Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side, and said to him, "Reverend Sāriputta, a mendicant
protégé of mine has resigned the training and returned to a lesser
life."

"That's how it is, reverend, when someone doesn't guard the sense doors,
eats too much, and is not committed to wakefulness. It is quite
impossible for such a mendicant to maintain the full and pure spiritual
life for the rest of their life. But it is quite possible for a
mendicant to maintain the full and pure spiritual life for the rest of
their life if they guard the sense doors, eat in moderation, and are
committed to wakefulness.

And how does someone guard the sense doors? When a mendicant sees a
sight with the eyes, they don't get caught up in the features and
details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful
qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For
this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the faculty of sight,
and achieving its restraint. When they hear a sound with their ears ...
When they smell an odor with their nose ... When they taste a flavor
with their tongue ... When they feel a touch with their body ... When
they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint. That's how someone guards
the sense doors.

And how does someone eat in moderation? It's when a mendicant reflects
rationally on the food that they eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence,
adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain this body, to avoid harm,
and to support spiritual practice. In this way, I shall put an end to
old discomfort and not give rise to new discomfort, and I will have the
means to keep going, blamelessness, and a comfortable abiding.' That's
how someone eats in moderation.

And how is someone committed to wakefulness? It's when a mendicant
practices walking and sitting meditation by day, purifying their mind
from obstacles. In the first watch of the night, they continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle watch, they lie
down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top
of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.
In the last watch, they get up and continue to practice walking and
sitting meditation, purifying their mind from obstacles. That's how
someone is committed to wakefulness.

So you should train like this: 'We will guard the sense doors, eat in
moderation, and be committed to wakefulness.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.121 Advice to Rāhula *Rāhulovādasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta's
Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika's monastery.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "The
qualities that ripen in freedom have ripened in Rāhula. Why
don't I lead him further to the ending of defilements?"

Then the Buddha robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe,
wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his
return from almsround, he addressed Venerable Rāhula,
"Rāhula, get your sitting cloth. Let's go to the Dark
Forest for the day's meditation."

"Yes, sir," replied Rāhula. Taking his sitting cloth he
followed behind the Buddha.

Now at that time many thousands of deities followed the Buddha,
thinking, "Today the Buddha will lead Rāhula further to the
ending of defilements!"

Then the Buddha plunged deep into the Dark Forest and sat at the root of
a tree on the seat spread out. Rāhula bowed to the Buddha
and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:

"What do you think, Rāhula? Is the eye permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Anything included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness
that arises conditioned by eye contact: is that permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are ideas ... mind consciousness ... mind contact permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir." ...

"Anything included in feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness
that arises conditioned by mind contact: is that permanent or
impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they become
disillusioned with anything included in feeling, perception, choices,
and consciousness that arises conditioned by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...

They grow disillusioned with the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and
mind contact. And they grow disillusioned with anything included in
feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness that arises conditioned
by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

That is what the Buddha said. Satisfied, Venerable Rāhula
approved what the Buddha said. And while this discourse was being
spoken, Rāhula's mind was freed from defilements by not
grasping.

And the stainless, immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in those
thousands of deities:

"Everything that has a beginning has an end."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.122 Things Prone to Being Fettered *Saṁyojaniyadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that are prone to being
fettered, and the fetter. Listen ...

What are the things that are prone to being fettered? And what is the
fetter? There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things
that are prone to being fettered. The desire and greed for them is the
fetter.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... thoughts known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are called the things that are prone to being
fettered. The desire and greed for them is the fetter."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.123 Things Prone to Fuel Grasping *Upādāniyadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the things that fuel grasping, and the
grasping. Listen ...

What are the things that fuel grasping? And what is the grasping? There
are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. These are called the things that fuel
grasping. The desire and greed for them is the grasping.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. These are called the things that fuel grasping. The desire
and greed for them is the grasping."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Householders

### N 35.124 At Vesālī *Vesālīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the
Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof. Then the householder Ugga
of Vesālī went up to the Buddha, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are
not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause, sir, what
is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this
very life?"

"Householder, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness has
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant with fuel for
grasping does not become extinguished.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, their consciousness has that as support and fuel for grasping. A
mendicant with fuel for grasping does not become extinguished.

That's the cause, that's the reason why some sentient beings are not
fully extinguished in this very life.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn't
have that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant free of grasping
becomes extinguished.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, their consciousness doesn't have that as support and fuel for
grasping. A mendicant free of grasping becomes extinguished.

That's the cause, that's the reason why some sentient beings are fully
extinguished in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.125 In the Land of the Vajjis *Vajjīsutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis at Elephant
Village. Then the householder Ugga of Elephant Village went up to the
Buddha, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are
not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause, sir, what
is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this
very life?" ...

**(Tell in full as in the previous discourse.)**

<!--pg-->
### N 35.126 At Nāḷandā *Nāḷandasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove.

Then the householder Upāli went up to the Buddha ... and
asked him, "What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient
beings are not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause,
sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished
in this very life?" ...

**(Tell in full as in SN 35.124.)**

<!--pg-->
### N 35.127 With Bhāradvāja *Bhāradvājasutta*

At one time Venerable Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer was
staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. Then King
Udena went up to Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer and exchanged
greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation were
over, he sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Worthy Bhāradvāja, there are these young monks who are
youthful, with pristine black hair, blessed with youth, in the prime of
life; and they've never played around with sensual pleasures. What is
the cause, what is the reason why they practice the full and pure
spiritual life as long as they live, maintaining it for a long time?"

"Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and
sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha:

'Please, monks, think of women your mother's age as your mother. Think
of women your sister's age as your sister. And think of women your
daughter's age as your daughter.'

This is a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks
practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live,
maintaining it for a long time."

"But worthy Bhāradvāja, the mind is wanton. Sometimes
thoughts of desire come up even for women your mother's age, your
sister's age, or your daughter's age. Is there another cause, another
reason why these young monks live the full and pure spiritual life for
their entire life?"

"Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and
sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha:

'Please, monks, examine your own body up from the soles of the feet and
down from the tips of the hairs, wrapped in skin and full of many kinds
of filth. In this body there is head hair, body hair, nails, teeth,
skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver,
diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces,
bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, snot,
synovial fluid, urine.'

This is also a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks
live the full and pure spiritual life for their entire life, maintaining
it for a long time."

"This is easy to do for those mendicants who have developed their
physical endurance, ethics, mind, and wisdom. But it's hard to do for
those mendicants who have not developed their physical endurance,
ethics, mind, and wisdom. Sometimes I plan to focus on something as
ugly, but only its beauty comes to mind. Is there another cause, another
reason why these young monks live the full and pure spiritual life for
their entire life?"

"Great king, this has been stated by the Blessed One, who knows and
sees, the perfected one, the fully awakened Buddha:

'Please, monks, live with sense doors guarded. When you see a sight with
your eyes, don't get caught up in the features and details. If the
faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason,
practice restraint, protect the faculty of sight, and achieve its
restraint. When you hear a sound with your ears ... When you smell an
odor with your nose ... When you taste a flavor with your tongue ...
When you feel a touch with your body ... When you know an idea with your
mind, don't get caught up in the features and details. If the faculty of
mind were left unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness
and displeasure would become overwhelming. For this reason, practice
restraint, protect the faculty of mind, and achieve its restraint.'

This is also a cause, great king, this is a reason why these young monks
practice the full and pure spiritual life as long as they live,
maintaining it for a long time."

"It's incredible, worthy Bhāradvāja, it's amazing! How well
this was said by the Buddha! This is the real cause, this is the reason
why these young monks practice the full and pure spiritual life as long
as they live, maintaining it for a long time.

For sometimes I too enter the harem with unprotected body, speech, mind,
mindfulness, and sense faculties. At those times powerful thoughts of
desire get the better of me. But sometimes I enter the harem with
protected body, speech, mind, mindfulness, and sense faculties. At those
times such thoughts of desire don't get the better of me.

Excellent, worthy Bhāradvāja! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, the worthy Bhāradvāja has made
the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth,
may the worthy Bhāradvāja remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.128 With Soṇa *Soṇasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground.

Then the householder Soṇa went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are
not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause, sir, what
is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished in this
very life?" ...

**(Tell in full as in SN 35.118.)**

<!--pg-->
### N 35.129 With Ghosita *Ghositasutta*

At one time Venerable Ānanda was staying near Kosambī, in
Ghosita's Monastery. Then the householder Ghosita went up to Venerable
Ānanda, and said to him:

"Honorable Ānanda, they speak of 'the diversity of elements'. In what
way did the Buddha speak of the diversity of elements?"

"Householder, the eye element is found, as are agreeable sights, and eye
consciousness. Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as pleasant. The eye element is found, as are disagreeable
sights, and eye consciousness. Painful feeling arises dependent on a
contact to be experienced as painful. The eye element is found, as are
sights that are a basis for equanimity, and eye consciousness. Neutral
feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind element is found, as are
agreeable ideas, and mind consciousness. Pleasant feeling arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. The mind element
is found, as are disagreeable ideas, and mind consciousness. Painful
feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as painful. The
mind element is found, as are ideas that are a basis for equanimity, and
mind consciousness. Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as neutral.

This is how the Buddha spoke of the diversity of elements."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.130 With Hāliddikāni *Hāliddikānisutta*

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land
of the Avantis near Kuraraghara on Steep Mountain.

Then the householder Hāliddikāni went up to Venerable
Mahākaccāna ... and asked him, "Sir, this was said by the
Buddha: 'Diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts, and
diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings.' How does
diversity of elements give rise to diversity of contacts, and diversity
of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings?"

"Householder, it's when a mendicant sees a sight with the eye and
understands it to be agreeable. There is eye consciousness; and pleasant
feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant.
Then they see a sight and understand it to be disagreeable. There is eye
consciousness; and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as painful. Then they see a sight and understand it to be a
basis for equanimity. There is eye consciousness; and neutral feeling
arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as neutral.

Furthermore, a mendicant hears a sound with the ear ... smells an odor
with the nose ... tastes a flavor with the tongue ... feels a touch with
the body ... knows an idea with the mind and understands it to be
agreeable. There is mind consciousness; and pleasant feeling arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as pleasant. Then they know an
idea and understand it to be disagreeable. There is mind consciousness;
and painful feeling arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as
painful. Then they know an idea and understand it to be a basis for
equanimity. Neutral feeling arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as neutral.

That's how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of contacts,
and diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.131 Nakula's Father *Nakulapitusutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Bhaggas at
Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā's Wood.

Then the householder Nakula's father went up to the Buddha ... and asked
him, "What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some sentient
beings are not fully extinguished in this very life? What is the cause,
sir, what is the reason why some sentient beings are fully extinguished
in this very life?"

"Householder, there are sights known by the eye, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness has
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant with fuel for
grasping does not become extinguished. There are sounds ... smells ...
tastes ... touches ... ideas known by the mind, which are likable,
desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant
approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, their consciousness has
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant with fuel for
grasping does not become extinguished. That's the cause, that's the
reason why some sentient beings are not fully extinguished in this very
life.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn't
have that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant free of grasping
becomes extinguished. There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches
... ideas known by the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable,
pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve,
welcome, and keep clinging to them, their consciousness doesn't have
that as support and fuel for grasping. A mendicant free of grasping
becomes extinguished. That's the cause, that's the reason why some
sentient beings are fully extinguished in this very life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.132 With Lohicca *Lohiccasutta*

At one time Venerable Mahākaccāna was staying in the land
of the Avantis in a wilderness hut near Makkarakaṭa.

Then several students, pupils of the brahmin Lohicca, approached
Mahākaccāna's wilderness hut while collecting firewood.
They walked and wandered all around the hut, making a dreadful racket
and all kinds of jeers: "These shavelings, fake ascetics, primitives,
black spawn from the feet of our kinsman, the Lord! They're honored,
respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by those who pretend to
inherit Vedic culture."

And then Mahākaccāna left his dwelling and said to those
young students, "Young students, stop being so noisy. I will speak to
you on the teaching."

When this was said, the young students fell silent. Then
Mahākaccāna recited these verses for them.

> "The brahmins of old championed ethics\
> and remembered the ancient traditions.\
> Their sense doors were guarded, well protected,\
> and they had mastered anger.
>
> Those brahmins who remembered\
> － the ancient traditions\
> enjoyed virtue and absorption.
>
> But these have lost their way. Claiming to recite,\
> they live out of balance,\
> － judging everyone by their clan.\
> Mastered by anger, they take up many arms,\
> attacking both the strong and the weak.
>
> All is vain for someone\
> － who doesn't guard the sense doors,\
> like the wealth a person finds in a dream.\
> Fasting, sleeping on bare ground,\
> bathing at dawn, the three Vedas,
>
> rough hides, dreadlocks, and dirt,\
> hymns, precepts and observances,\
> － and fervent austerities,\
> those fake bent staffs,\
> and rinsing with water.\
> These emblems of the brahmins\
> are only used to generate profits.
>
> A mind that's serene,\
> clear and undisturbed,\
> kind to all creatures:\
> that's the path to attainment of divinity!"

Then those young students, offended and upset, went to the brahmin
Lohicca and said to him, "Please, master, you should know this. The
ascetic Mahākaccāna condemns and rejects outright the hymns
of the brahmins!"

When they said this, Lohicca was offended and upset. Then he thought,
"But it wouldn't be appropriate for me to abuse or insult the ascetic
Mahākaccāna solely because of what I've heard from these
young students. Why don't I go and ask him about it?"

Then the brahmin Lohicca together with those young students went to
Venerable Mahākaccāna and exchanged greetings with him.

When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to him, "Master Kaccāna, did several young
pupils of mine come by here collecting firewood?"

"They did, brahmin."

"But did you have some discussion with them?"

"I did."

"But what kind of discussion did you have with them?"

"This is the discussion I had with these young students." And he
repeated the verses in full.

"Worthy Kaccāna spoke of someone who doesn't guard the
sense doors. How do you define someone who doesn't guard the sense
doors?"

"Brahmin, take someone who sees a sight with their eyes. If it's
pleasant they hold on to it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it.
They live with mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart
restricted. And they don't truly understand the freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease
without anything left over.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, if it's pleasant they hold on to
it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness
of the body unestablished and a limited heart. And they don't truly
understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen
bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

That's how someone doesn't guard the sense doors."

"It's incredible, worthy Kaccāna, it's amazing! How
accurately you've explained someone whose sense doors are unguarded!

You also spoke of someone who does guard the sense doors. How do you
define someone who does guard the sense doors?"

"Brahmin, take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it's
pleasant they don't hold on to it, and if it's unpleasant they don't
dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the body established and a
limitless heart. And they truly understand the freedom of heart and
freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease
without anything left over.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, if it's pleasant they don't hold
on to it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And they
truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those
arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

That's how someone guards the sense doors."

"It's incredible, worthy Kaccāna, it's amazing! How
accurately you've explained someone whose sense doors are guarded!
Excellent, worthy Kaccāna! Excellent! As if he were
righting the overturned, or revealing the hidden, or pointing out the
path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the dark so people with clear
eyes can see what's there, the worthy Kaccāna has made the
teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth,
may the worthy Kaccāna remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life.

Please come to my family just as you go to the families of the lay
followers in Makkarakaṭa. The brahmin boys and girls there
will bow to you, rise in your presence, and give you a seat and water.
That will be for their lasting welfare and happiness."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.133 Verahaccāni *Verahaccānisutta*

At one time Venerable Udāyī was staying near
Kāmaṇḍā in the brahmin Todeyya's mango grove.

Then a boy who was a pupil of the brahmin lady of the
Verahaccāni clan went up to Udāyī and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side. Udāyī educated,
encouraged, fired up, and inspired that young student with a Dhamma
talk.

Then that young student went to the brahmin lady of the
Verahaccāni clan and said to her, "Please, madam, you
should know this. The ascetic Udāyī proclaims a teaching
that is good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And he reveals a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure."

"Then, young student, invite him in my name for tomorrow's meal."

"Yes, madam," he replied. He went to Udāyī and said, "Sir,
might the worthy Udāyī please accept an offering of
tomorrow's meal from my tutor's wife, the brahmin lady of the
Verahaccāni clan." Udāyī consented with
silence.

Then when the night had passed, Udāyī robed up in the
morning and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the brahmin lady's home,
and sat down on the seat spread out. Then the brahmin lady served and
satisfied Udāyī with her own hands with delicious fresh and
cooked foods.

When Udāyī had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she put
on a pair of shoes, sat on a high seat, covered her head, and said to
him, "Ascetic, preach the Dhamma."

"There will be an occasion for that, sister," he replied, then got up
from his seat and left.

For a second time that young student went to Venerable
Udāyī ...

And for a second time that young student went to the brahmin lady of the
Verahaccāni clan ...

She said to him, "You keep praising the ascetic Udāyī like
this. But when I asked him to preach the Dhamma he just said that there
would be an occasion for that, and then he got up and left."

"Madam, that's because you put on a pair of shoes, sat on a high seat,
and covered your head before inviting him to teach. For the good fellows
respect the teaching."

"Then, young student, invite him in my name for tomorrow's meal."

"Yes, madam," he replied. ...

Then the brahmin lady served and satisfied Udāyī with her
own hands with delicious fresh and cooked foods.

When Udāyī had eaten and washed his hand and bowl, she took
off her shoes, sat on a low seat, uncovered her head, and said to him,
"Sir, when what exists do the perfected ones declare that there is
pleasure and pain? When what doesn't exist do the perfected ones not
declare that there is pleasure and pain?"

"Sister, when there's an eye, the perfected ones declare that there is
pleasure and pain. When there's no eye, the perfected ones don't declare
that there is pleasure and pain. When there's an ear ... nose ... tongue
... body ... mind, the perfected ones declare that there is pleasure and
pain. When there's no mind, the perfected ones don't declare that there
is pleasure and pain."

When he said this, the brahmin lady said to Udāyī,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there,
Master Udāyī has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go
for refuge to the Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant
Saṅgha. From this day forth, may Master Udāyī
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter at Devadaha

### N 35.134 At Devadaha *Devadahasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near the
Sakyan town named Devadaha. There the Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"When it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants, I don't say
that all mendicants have work to do with diligence, nor do I say that
none of them have work to do with diligence.

I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants don't
have work to do with diligence if they are perfected, with defilements
ended, having completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done,
laid down the burden, achieved their own goal, utterly ended the fetter
of continued existence, and become rightly freed through enlightenment.
Why is that?

They've done their work with diligence, and are incapable of negligence.

I say that, when it comes to the six fields of contact, mendicants do
have work to do with diligence if they are trainees, who haven't
achieved their heart's desire, but live aspiring to the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke. Why is that?

There are sights known by the eye that are pleasant and also those that
are unpleasant. Though experiencing them again and again they don't
occupy the mind. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their
mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and
undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi. Seeing
this fruit of diligence, I say that those mendicants have work to do
with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact. ...

There are ideas known by the mind that are pleasant and also those that
are unpleasant. Though experiencing them again and again they don't
occupy the mind. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their
mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and
undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi. Seeing
this fruit of diligence, I say that those mendicants have work to do
with diligence when it comes to the six fields of contact."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.135 Opportunity *Khaṇasutta*

"You're fortunate, mendicants, so very fortunate, to have the
opportunity to lead the spiritual life. I've seen the hell called
'Related to the Six Fields of Contact'. There, whatever sight you see
with your eye is unlikable, not likable; undesirable, not desirable;
unpleasant, not pleasant.

Whatever sound you hear ...

Whatever odor you smell ...

Whatever flavor you taste ...

Whatever touch you feel ...

Whatever idea you know with your mind is unlikable, not likable;
undesirable, not desirable; unpleasant, not pleasant. You're fortunate,
mendicants, so very fortunate, to have the opportunity to lead the
spiritual life. I've seen the heaven called 'Related to the Six Fields
of Contact'. There, whatever sight you see with your eye is likable, not
unlikable; desirable, not undesirable; pleasant, not unpleasant.

Whatever sound ... odor ... flavor ... touch ...

Whatever idea you know with your mind is likable, not unlikable;
desirable, not undesirable; pleasant, not unpleasant. You're fortunate,
mendicants, so very fortunate, to have the opportunity to lead the
spiritual life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.136 Liking Sights (1st) *Paṭhamarūpārāmasutta*

"Mendicants, gods and humans like sights, they love them and enjoy them.
But when sights perish, fade away, and cease, gods and humans live in
suffering.

Gods and humans like sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas,
they love them and enjoy them. But when ideas perish, fade away, and
cease, gods and humans live in suffering.

The Realized One has truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape of sights, so he doesn't like, love, or enjoy them.
When sights perish, fade away, and cease, the Realized One lives
happily.

The Realized One has truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape of sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ...
ideas, so he doesn't like, love, or enjoy them. When ideas perish, fade
away, and cease, the Realized One lives happily."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Sights, sounds, tastes, smells,\
> touches and ideas, the lot of them---\
> they're likable, desirable, and pleasurable\
> as long as you can say that they exist.
>
> For all the world with its gods,\
> this is what they deem happiness.\
> And where they cease\
> is deemed as suffering for them.
>
> The noble ones have seen that happiness\
> is the cessation of substantial reality.\
> This insight by those who see\
> contradicts the whole world.
>
> What others say is happiness\
> the noble ones say is suffering.\
> What others say is suffering\
> the noble ones know as happiness.
>
> See, this teaching is hard to understand,\
> it confuses the ignorant.\
> There is darkness for the shrouded;\
> blackness for those who don't see.
>
> But the good are open;\
> like light for those who see.\
> Though close, they do not understand,\
> those fools inexpert in the teaching.
>
> They're mired in desire to be reborn,\
> flowing along the stream of lives,\
> mired in Māra's dominion:\
> this teaching isn't easy for them to understand.
>
> Who, apart from the noble ones,\
> is qualified to understand this state?\
> Having rightly understood this state,\
> the undefiled are fully extinguished."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.137 Liking Sights (2nd) *Dutiyarūpārāmasutta*

"Mendicants, gods and humans like sights, they love them and enjoy them.
But when sights perish, fade away, and cease, gods and humans live in
suffering. ...

The Realized One has truly understood the origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape of sights, so he doesn't like, love, or enjoy them.
When sights perish, fade away, and cease, the Realized One lives
happily. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.138 Not Yours (1st) *Paṭhamanatumhākasutta*

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours? The eye isn't yours: give
it up. Giving it up will be for your welfare and happiness.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind isn't yours: give it up.
Giving it up will be for your welfare and happiness.

Suppose a person was to carry off the grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves in this Jeta's Grove, or burn them, or do what they want with
them. Would you think: 'This person is carrying us off, burning us, or
doing what they want with us'?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because to us that's neither self nor belonging
to self."

"In the same way, the eye isn't yours: give it up. Giving it up will be
for your welfare and happiness.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind isn't yours: give it up.
Giving it up will be for your welfare and happiness."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.139 Not Yours (2nd) *Dutiyanatumhākasutta*

"Mendicants, give up what's not yours. Giving it up will be for your
welfare and happiness. And what isn't yours? Sights aren't yours: give
them up. Giving them up will be for your welfare and happiness.

Sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas aren't yours: give them up.
Giving them up will be for your welfare and happiness.

Suppose a person was to carry off the grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves in this Jeta's Grove ...

In the same way, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas
aren't yours: give them up. Giving them up will be for your welfare and
happiness."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.140 Interior and Cause Are Impermanent *Ajjhattaaniccahetusutta*

"Mendicants, the eye is impermanent. The cause and reason that gives
rise to the eye is also impermanent. Since the eye is produced by what
is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is impermanent. The cause
and reason that gives rise to the mind is also impermanent. Since the
mind is produced by what is impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.141 Interior and Cause Are Suffering *Ajjhattadukkhahetusutta*

"Mendicants, the eye is suffering. The cause and reason that gives rise
to the eye is also suffering. Since the eye is produced by what is
suffering, how could it be happiness?

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is suffering. The cause
and reason that gives rise to the mind is also suffering. Since the mind
is produced by what is suffering, how could it be happiness?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.142 Interior and Cause Are Not-Self *Ajjhattānattahetusutta*

"Mendicants, the eye is not-self. The cause and reason that gives rise
to the eye is also not-self. Since the eye is produced by what is
not-self, how could it be self?

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is not-self. The cause and
reason that gives rise to the mind is also not-self. Since the mind is
produced by what is not-self, how could it be self?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.143 Exterior and Cause Are Impermanent *Bāhirāniccahetusutta*

"Mendicants, sights are impermanent. The cause and reason that gives
rise to sights is also impermanent. Since sights are produced by what is
impermanent, how could they be permanent?

Sounds ...

Smells ...

Tastes ...

Touches ...

Ideas are impermanent. The cause and reason that gives rise to ideas is
also impermanent. Since ideas are produced by what is impermanent, how
could they be permanent?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

### N 35.144 Exterior and Cause Are Suffering *Bāhiradukkhahetusutta*

"Mendicants, sights are suffering. The cause and reason that gives rise
to sights is also suffering. Since sights are produced by what is
suffering, how could they be happiness?

Sounds ...

Smells ...

Tastes ...

Touches ...

Ideas are suffering. The cause and reason that gives rise to ideas is
also suffering. Since ideas are produced by what is suffering, how could
they be happiness?

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"


### N 35.145 Exterior and Cause Are Not-Self *Bāhirānattahetusutta*

"Mendicants, sights are not-self. The cause and reason that gives rise
to sights is also not-self. Since sights are produced by what is
not-self, how could they be self?

Sounds ...

Smells ...

Tastes ...

Touches ...

Ideas are not-self. The cause and reason that gives rise to ideas is
also not-self. Since ideas are produced by what is not-self, how could
they be self?

Seeing this ... Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire
fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Old and the New

### N 35.146 The Cessation of Deeds *Kammanirodhasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you old deeds, new deeds, the cessation of
deeds, and the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds. Listen and
apply your mind well, I will speak. ...

And what is old deeds?

The eye is old deeds. It should be seen as produced by choices and
intentions, as something to be felt.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is old deeds. It should be
seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt.

This is called old deeds.

And what is new deeds?

The deeds you currently perform by way of body, speech, and mind.

These are called new deeds.

And what is the cessation of deeds?

When you experience freedom due to the cessation of deeds by body,
speech, and mind.

This is called the cessation of deeds.

And what's the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is: right view, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds.

So, mendicants, I've taught you old deeds, new deeds, the cessation of
deeds, and the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be negligent!
Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.147 The Impermanent as Conducive to Extinguishment *Aniccanibbānasappāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a practice that's conducive to
extinguishment. Listen ...

And what is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment?

It's when a mendicant sees that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact are impermanent. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also
impermanent.

They see that the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, ideas,
mind-consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent. And they see that
the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact is also impermanent.

This is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.148 The Suffering as Conducive to Extinguishment *Dukkhanibbānasappāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a practice that's conducive to
extinguishment. Listen ...

And what is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment?

It's when a mendicant sees that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact are suffering. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also
suffering.

They see that the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, ideas,
mind-consciousness, and mind contact are suffering. And they see that
the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact is also suffering.

This is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment."

### N 35.149 Not-Self as Conducive to Extinguishment *Anattanibbānasappāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a practice that's conducive to
extinguishment. Listen ...

And what is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment?

It's when a mendicant sees that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact are not-self. And they see that the painful, pleasant, or
neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also not-self.

They see that the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind, ideas,
mind-consciousness, and mind contact are not-self. And they see that the
painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact is also not-self.

This is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.150 A Practice Conducive to Extinguishment *Nibbānasappāyapaṭipadāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you a practice that's conducive to
extinguishment. Listen ...

And what is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment?

What do you think, mendicants? Is the eye permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Are sights ... eye consciousness ... eye contact ...

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?"

"Impermanent, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?"

"Suffering, sir."

"But if it's impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, I am this, this is my self'?"

"No, sir."

"Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they grow disillusioned
with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned
by mind contact. Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire
fades away they're freed. ...

They understand: '... there is nothing further for this place.'

This is that practice that's conducive to extinguishment."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.151 A Resident Pupil *Antevāsikasutta*

"Mendicants, this spiritual life is lived without a resident pupil and
without a teaching master. A mendicant who lives with a resident pupil
and a teaching master lives in suffering and discomfort. A mendicant who
lives without a resident pupil and a teaching master lives in happiness
and comfort.

And how does a mendicant who lives with a resident pupil and a teaching
master live in suffering and discomfort?

When a mendicant sees a sight with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena
arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Those qualities reside
within. Since they have bad unskillful qualities residing within,
they're said to have a resident pupil. Those qualities master them.
Since they're mastered by bad unskillful qualities, they're said to have
a teaching master.

Furthermore, when a mendicant hears ... smells ... tastes ... touches
... knows an idea with the mind, bad, unskillful phenomena arise:
memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Those qualities reside within.
Since they have bad unskillful qualities residing within, they're said
to have a resident pupil. Those qualities master them. Since they're
mastered by bad unskillful qualities, they're said to have a teaching
master. That's how a mendicant who lives with a resident pupil and a
teaching master lives in suffering and discomfort.

And how does a mendicant who lives without a resident pupil and a
teaching master live in happiness and comfort?

When a mendicant sees a sight with the eye, bad, unskillful phenomena
don't arise: memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Those qualities
don't reside within. Since they don't have bad unskillful qualities
residing within, they're said to not have a resident pupil. Those
qualities don't master them. Since they're not mastered by bad
unskillful qualities, they're said to not have a teaching master.

Furthermore, when a mendicant hears ... smells ... tastes ... touches
... knows an idea with the mind, bad, unskillful phenomena don't arise:
memories and thoughts prone to fetters. Those qualities don't reside
within. Since they don't have bad unskillful qualities residing within,
they're said to not have a resident pupil. Those qualities don't master
them. Since they're not mastered by bad unskillful qualities, they're
said to not have a teaching master.

That's how a mendicant who lives without a resident pupil and a teaching
master lives in happiness and comfort.

This spiritual life is lived without a resident pupil and without a
teaching master. A mendicant who lives with a resident pupil and a
teaching master lives in suffering and discomfort. A mendicant who lives
without a resident pupil and a teaching master lives in happiness and
comfort."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.152 What's the Purpose of the Spiritual Life? *Kimatthiyabrahmacariyasutta*

"Mendicants, if wanderers who follow another religion were to ask you:
'Reverends, what's the purpose of leading the spiritual life under the
ascetic Gotama?'

You should answer them: 'The purpose of leading the spiritual life under
the Buddha is to completely understand suffering.'

If wanderers of other religions were to ask you: 'Reverends, what is
that suffering?'

You should answer them: 'The eye is suffering. The purpose of leading
the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand this.
Sights ... Eye consciousness ... Eye contact ... The pleasant, painful,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also
suffering. The purpose of leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is
to completely understand this.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... The pleasant, painful,
or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also
suffering. The purpose of living the spiritual life under the Buddha is
to completely understand this. This is that suffering. The purpose of
leading the spiritual life under the Buddha is to completely understand
this.'

When questioned by wanderers of other religions, that's how you should
answer them."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.153 Is There a Method? *Atthinukhopariyāyasutta*

"Mendicants, is there a method---apart from faith, endorsement, oral
transmission, reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view after
deliberation---that a mendicant can rely on to declare their
enlightenment? That is: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place."'"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Well then, mendicants, listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," they replied. The Buddha said this:

"There is a method---apart from faith, endorsement, oral transmission,
reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view after
deliberation---that a mendicant can rely on to declare their
enlightenment. That is: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place."'

And what is that method? Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye.
When they have greed, hate, and delusion in them, they understand 'I
have greed, hate, and delusion in me.' When they don't have greed, hate,
and delusion in them, they understand 'I don't have greed, hate, and
delusion in me.' Since this is so, are these things understood by faith,
endorsement, oral transmission, reasoned train of thought, or acceptance
of a view after deliberation?"

"No, sir."

"Aren't they understood by seeing them with wisdom?"

"Yes, sir."

"This is a method---apart from faith, endorsement, oral transmission,
reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view after
deliberation---that a mendicant can rely on to declare their
enlightenment. That is: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place."'

Furthermore, a mendicant hears a sound ... smells an odor ... tastes a
flavor ... feels a touch ... knows an idea with the mind. When they have
greed, hate, and delusion in them, they understand 'I have greed, hate,
and delusion in me.' When they don't have greed, hate, and delusion in
them, they understand 'I don't have greed, hate, and delusion in me.'
Since this is so, are these things understood by faith, endorsement,
oral transmission, reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view
after deliberation?"

"No, sir."

"Aren't they understood by seeing them with wisdom?"

"Yes, sir."

"This too is a method---apart from faith, endorsement, oral
transmission, reasoned train of thought, or acceptance of a view after
deliberation---that a mendicant can rely on to declare their
enlightenment. That is: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place."'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.154 Endowed With Faculties *Indriyasampannasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of someone who is 'accomplished regarding the faculties'. How is
someone accomplished regarding the faculties defined?"

"Mendicant, if someone meditates observing rise and fall in the eye
faculty, they grow disillusioned with the eye faculty.

If they meditate observing rise and fall in the ear faculty ... nose
faculty ... tongue faculty ... body faculty ... mind faculty, they grow
disillusioned with the mind faculty.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. ... When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the faculties is
defined."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.155 A Dhamma Speaker *Dhammakathikapucchasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and asked him, "Sir, they
speak of a 'Dhamma speaker'. How is a Dhamma speaker defined?"

"If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding the eye, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant
who speaks on Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding the eye, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding the eye, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant
who has attained extinguishment in this very life'.

If a mendicant teaches Dhamma for disillusionment with the ear ... nose
... tongue ... body ... mind, for its fading away and cessation, they're
qualified to be called a 'mendicant who speaks on Dhamma'.

If they practice for disillusionment, dispassion, and cessation
regarding the mind, they're qualified to be called a 'mendicant who
practices in line with the teaching'.

If they're freed by not grasping by disillusionment, dispassion, and
cessation regarding the mind, they're qualified to be called a
'mendicant who has attained extinguishment in this very life'."

**the fourth fifty**

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the End of Relishing

### N 35.156 The Interior and the End of Relishing *Ajjhattanandikkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye really is impermanent. A mendicant sees that it is
impermanent: that's their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow
disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends,
relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be
well freed.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind really is impermanent. A
mendicant sees that it is impermanent: that's their right view. Seeing
rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When
greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is
said to be well freed."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.157 The Exterior and the End of Relishing *Bāhiranandikkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, sights really are impermanent. A mendicant sees that they
are impermanent: that's their right view. Seeing rightly, they grow
disillusioned. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed ends,
relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to be
well freed.

Sounds ... Smells ... Tastes ... Touches ... Ideas really are
impermanent. A mendicant sees that they are impermanent: that's their
right view. Seeing rightly, they grow disillusioned. When relishing
ends, greed ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and
greed end, the mind is said to be well freed."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.158 Focus, the Interior, and the End of Relishing *Ajjhattaaniccanandikkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, rationally apply the mind to the eye. Truly see the
impermanence of the eye. When a mendicant does this, they grow
disillusioned with the eye. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed
ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to
be well freed.

Rationally apply the mind to the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind. Truly see the impermanence of the mind. When a mendicant does
this, they grow disillusioned with the mind. When relishing ends, greed
ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the
mind is said to be well freed."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.159 Focus, the Exterior, and the End of Relishing *Bāhiraaniccanandikkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, rationally apply the mind to sights. Truly see the
impermanence of sights. When a mendicant does this, they grow
disillusioned with sights. When relishing ends, greed ends. When greed
ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the mind is said to
be well freed.

Rationally apply the mind to sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches
... ideas. Truly see the impermanence of ideas. When a mendicant does
this, they grow disillusioned with ideas. When relishing ends, greed
ends. When greed ends, relishing ends. When relishing and greed end, the
mind is said to be well freed."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.160 On Immersion at Jīvaka's Mango Grove *Jīvakambavanasamādhisutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in
Jīvaka's Mango Grove. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, develop immersion. For a mendicant with immersion, things
become truly clear. And what becomes truly clear?

It becomes truly clear that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye
contact are impermanent. And it also becomes truly clear that the
painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact is impermanent.

It becomes truly clear that the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent. And
it also becomes truly clear that the painful, pleasant, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is impermanent.

Mendicants, develop immersion. For a mendicant with immersion, things
become truly clear."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.161 On Retreat at Jīvaka's Mango Grove *Jīvakambavanapaṭisallānasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha in
Jīvaka's Mango Grove. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants:

"Mendicants, meditate in retreat. For a mendicant who meditates in
retreat, things become truly clear. And what becomes truly clear?

It becomes truly clear that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye
contact are impermanent. And it also becomes truly clear that the
painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye
contact is impermanent. ...

It becomes truly clear that the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and
mind contact are impermanent. And it also becomes truly clear that the
painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind
contact is impermanent.

Mendicants, meditate in retreat. For a mendicant who meditates in
retreat, things become truly clear."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.162 With Koṭṭhita on Impermanence *Koṭṭhikaaniccasutta*

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita went up to the Buddha ... and
asked him, "Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When
I've heard it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and
resolute."

"Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is
impermanent. And what is impermanent? The eye, sights, eye
consciousness, and eye contact are impermanent: you should give up
desire for them. The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent: you should give up
desire for it.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent: you should give up
desire for them. The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by mind contact is also impermanent: you should give up
desire for it.

Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is
impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.163 With Koṭṭhita on Suffering *Koṭṭhikadukkhasutta*

Then Venerable Mahākoṭṭhita ... said to the Buddha:

"Sir, may the Buddha please teach me Dhamma in brief. When I've heard
it, I'll live alone, withdrawn, diligent, keen, and resolute."

"Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is suffering.
And what is suffering?

The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are suffering: you
should give up desire for them. The pleasant, painful, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also suffering; you
should give up desire for it.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are suffering: you should give up desire
for them. The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by mind contact is also suffering: you should give up desire
for it.

Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is suffering."

### N 35.164 With Koṭṭhita on Not-Self *Koṭṭhikaanattasutta*

"Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is not-self.
And what is not-self?

The eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact are not-self: you
should give up desire for them. The pleasant, painful, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also not-self: You
should give up desire for it.

The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... The mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact ... The pleasant, painful, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is also not-self: you
should give up desire for it.

Koṭṭhita, you should give up desire for what is not-self."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.165 Giving Up Wrong View *Micchādiṭṭhipahānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that wrong view is given up?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact as impermanent, wrong view is given up. ...

And also knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by mind contact as impermanent, wrong view is
given up.

This is how to know and see so that wrong view is given up."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.166 Giving Up Substantialist View *Sakkāyadiṭṭhipahānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that substantialist view is given
up?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact as suffering, substantialist view is given up. ...

And also knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by mind contact as suffering, substantialist
view is given up.

This is how to know and see so that substantialist view is given up."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.167 Giving Up View of Self *Attānudiṭṭhipahānasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha ... and said to him:

"Sir, how does one know and see so that view of self is given up?"

"Mendicant, knowing and seeing the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact as not-self, view of self is given up. ...

And also knowing and seeing the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling
that arises conditioned by mind contact as not-self, view of self is
given up."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Sixty Abbreviated Texts

### N 35.168 Desire for the Impermanent Interior *Ajjhattaaniccachandasutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire for what is impermanent. And what
is impermanent?

The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are impermanent: you should
give up desire for them. You should give up desire for what is
impermanent."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.169 Greed for the Impermanent Interior *Ajjhattaaniccarāgasutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up greed for what is impermanent. And what
is impermanent?

The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.170 Desire and Greed for the Impermanent Interior *Ajjhattaaniccachandarāgasutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire and greed for what is
impermanent. And what is impermanent?

The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.171--173 Desire, Etc. for the Suffering Interior *Dukkhachandādisutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire ... greed ... desire and greed
for what is suffering. And what is suffering?

The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.174--176 Desire, Etc. for the Not-Self Interior *Anattachandādisutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire ... greed ... desire and greed
for what is not-self. And what is not-self?

The eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not-self ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.177--179 Desire, Etc. for the Impermanent Exterior *Bāhirāniccachandādisutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire ... greed ... desire and greed
for what is impermanent. And what is impermanent?

Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.180--182 Desire, Etc. for the Suffering Exterior *Bāhiradukkhachandādisutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire ... greed ... desire and greed
for what is suffering. And what is suffering?

Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.183--185 Desire, Etc. for the Not-Self Exterior *Bāhirānattachandādisutta*

"Mendicants, you should give up desire ... greed ... desire and greed
for what is not-self. And what is not-self?

Sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are not-self ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.186 The Interior Was Impermanent in the Past *Ajjhattātītāniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind were
impermanent.

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Being disillusioned, desire fades
away. When desire fades away they're freed. When they're freed, they
know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.187 The Interior Will Be Impermanent in the Future *Ajjhattānāgatāniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the future the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
will be impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.188 The Interior Is Impermanent in the Present *Ajjhattapaccuppannāniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the present the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
are impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.189--191 The Interior as Suffering in the Three Times *Ajjhattātītādidukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and mind are suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.192--194 The Interior as Not-Self in the Three Times *Ajjhattātītādianattasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and mind are not-self ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.195--197 The Exterior as Impermanent in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādianiccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are impermanent ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.198--200 The Exterior as Suffering in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādidukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.201--203 The Exterior as Not-Self in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādianattasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are not-self ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.204 The Interior and What's Impermanent in the Past *Ajjhattātītayadaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind were
impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. What's suffering is
not-self. And what's not-self should be truly seen with right
understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not this, this is not
my self.' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.205 The Interior and What's Impermanent in the Future *Ajjhattānāgatayadaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the future the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
will be impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.206 The Interior and What's Impermanent in the Present *Ajjhattapaccuppannayadaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the present the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind
are impermanent. What's impermanent is suffering. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.207--209 The Interior and What's Suffering in the Three Times *Ajjhattātītādiyaṁdukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and mind are suffering. What's suffering is not-self ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.210--212 The Interior and What's Not-Self in the Three Times *Ajjhattātītādiyadanattasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, and mind are not-self. And what's not-self should be truly
seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am not
this, this is not my self.' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.213--215 The Exterior and What's Impermanent in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādiyadaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are impermanent. What's impermanent is
suffering ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.216--218 The Exterior and What's Suffering in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādiyaṁdukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are suffering. What's suffering is not-self
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.219--221 The Exterior and What's Not-Self in the Three Times *Bāhirātītādiyadanattasutta*

"Mendicants, in the past ... future ... present sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas are not-self. And what's not-self should be
truly seen with right understanding like this: 'This is not mine, I am
not this, this is not my self.' ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.222 The Interior as Impermanent *Ajjhattāyatanaaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are impermanent.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.223 The Interior as Suffering *Ajjhattāyatanadukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are suffering.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.224 The Interior as Not-Self *Ajjhattāyatanaanattasutta*

"Mendicants, the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not-self.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.225 The Exterior as Impermanent *Bāhirāyatanaaniccasutta*

"Mendicants, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are
impermanent.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.226 The Exterior as Suffering *Bāhirāyatanadukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are
suffering.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.227 The Exterior as Not-Self *Bāhirāyatanaanattasutta*

"Mendicants, sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, and ideas are
not-self.

Seeing this ... They understand: '... there is nothing further for this
place.'"

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Ocean

### N 35.228 The Ocean (1st) *Paṭhamasamuddasutta*

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of the ocean. But
that's not the ocean in the training of the Noble One. That's just a
large body of water, a large sea of water. For a person, the eye is an
ocean, and its currents are made of sights.

Someone who can withstand those currents is said to have crossed over
the ocean of the eye, with its waves and whirlpools, its saltwater
crocodiles and monsters. Crossed over, the brahmin stands on the far
shore.

For a person, the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is an ocean,
and its currents are made of ideas. Someone who can withstand those
currents is said to have crossed over the ocean of the mind, with its
waves and whirlpools, its saltwater crocodiles and monsters. Crossed
over, the brahmin stands on the far shore."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "A knowledge master who's crossed\
> － the ocean so hard to cross,\
> with its saltwater crocodiles and monsters,\
> － its waves, whirlpools, and dangers;\
> they've completed the spiritual journey,\
> － and gone to the end of the world,\
> they're called 'one who has gone beyond'."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.229 The Ocean (2nd) *Dutiyasamuddasutta*

"Mendicants, an unlearned ordinary person speaks of the ocean. But
that's not the ocean in the training of the Noble One. That's just a
large body of water, a large sea of water.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. This is called the ocean in
the training of the Noble One. And it's here that this world---with its
gods, Māras, and divinities, this population with its
ascetics and brahmins, gods and humans---is for the most part sunk. It's
become tangled like string, knotted like a ball of thread, and matted
like rushes and reeds, and it doesn't escape the places of loss, the bad
places, the underworld, transmigration.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. This is called the ocean in the training of the Noble One.
And it's here that this world---with its gods, Māras, and
divinities, this population with its ascetics and brahmins, gods and
humans---is for the most part sunk. It's become tangled like string,
knotted like a ball of thread, and matted like rushes and reeds, and it
doesn't escape the places of loss, the bad places, the underworld,
transmigration.

> Those in whom greed, hate, and ignorance\
> have faded away;\
> have crossed the ocean so hard to cross,\
> with its saltwater crocodiles and monsters,\
> － its waves and dangers.
>
> They've slipped their snares, given up death, and have no
> attachments.\
> They've given up suffering,\
> － so there are no more future lives.\
> They've come to an end, and cannot be measured;\
> and they've confounded the King of Death, I say."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.230 The Simile of the Fisherman *Bāḷisikopamasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a fisherman was to cast a baited hook into a deep
lake. Seeing the bait, a fish would swallow it. And so the fish that
swallowed the hook would meet with tragedy and disaster, and the
fisherman can do what he wants with it.

In the same way, there are these six hooks in the world that mean
tragedy and slaughter for living creatures. What six?

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant approves,
welcomes, and keeps clinging to them, they're called a mendicant who has
swallowed Māra's hook. They've met with tragedy and
disaster, and the Wicked One can do with them what he wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant approves, welcomes, and keeps clinging to
them, they're called a mendicant who has swallowed Māra's
hook. They've met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One can do
with them what he wants.

There are sights known by the eye, which are likable, desirable,
agreeable, pleasant, sensual, and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't
approve, welcome, and keep clinging to them, they're called a mendicant
who hasn't swallowed Māra's hook. They've broken the hook,
destroyed it. They haven't met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked
One cannot do with them what he wants.

There are sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind, which are likable, desirable, agreeable, pleasant, sensual,
and arousing. If a mendicant doesn't approve, welcome, and keep clinging
to them, they're called a mendicant who hasn't swallowed
Māra's hook. They've broken the hook, destroyed it. They
haven't met with tragedy and disaster, and the Wicked One cannot do with
them what he wants."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.231 The Simile of the Latex-Producing Tree *Khīrarukkhopamasutta*

"Mendicants, take any monk or nun who, when it comes to sights known by
the eye, still has greed, hate, and delusion, and has not given them up.
If even trivial sights come into their range of vision they overcome
their mind, let alone those that are compelling. Why is that? Because
they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have not given them up.

When it comes to sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind, they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have
not given them up. If even trivial thoughts come into the range of the
mind they overcome their mind, let alone those that are compelling. Why
is that? Because they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have not
given them up.

Suppose there was a latex-producing tree---such as a peepal, a banyan, a
wavy leaf fig, or a cluster fig---that's a tender young sapling. If a
man were to chop it here and there with a sharp axe, would latex come
out?"

"Yes, sir.

Why is that? Because it still has latex."

"In the same way, take any monk or nun who, when it comes to sights
known by the eye, still has greed, hate, and delusion, and has not given
them up. If even trivial sights come into their range of vision they
overcome their mind, let alone those that are compelling. Why is that?
Because they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have not given
them up.

When it comes to sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind, they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have
not given them up. If even trivial thoughts come into the range of the
mind they overcome their mind, let alone those that are compelling. Why
is that? Because they still have greed, hate, and delusion, and have not
given them up.

Take any monk or nun who, when it comes to sights known by the eye, has
no greed, hate, and delusion left, and has given them up. If even
compelling sights come into their range of vision they don't overcome
their mind, let alone those that are trivial. Why is that? Because they
have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and have given them up.

When it comes to sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind, they have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and have
given them up. If even compelling ideas come into the range of the mind
they don't overcome their mind, let alone those that are trivial. Why is
that? Because they have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and have
given them up.

Suppose there was a latex-producing tree---such as a peepal, a banyan, a
wavy leaf fig, or a cluster fig---that's dried up, withered, and
decrepit. If a man were to chop it here and there with a sharp axe,
would latex come out?"

"No, sir. Why is that? Because it has no latex left."

"In the same way, take any monk or nun who, when it comes to sights
known by the eye, has no greed, hate, and delusion left, and has given
them up. If even compelling sights come into their range of vision they
don't overcome their mind, let alone those that are trivial. Why is
that? Because they have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and have
given them up.

When it comes to sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind, they have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and have
given them up. If even compelling thoughts come into the range of the
mind they don't overcome their mind, let alone those that are trivial.
Why is that? Because they have no greed, hate, and delusion left, and
have given them up."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.232 With Koṭṭhita *Koṭṭhikasutta*

At one time Venerable Sāriputta and Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita were staying near Varanasi, in the deer park
at Isipatana. Then in the late afternoon, Venerable
Mahākoṭṭhita came out of retreat, went to Venerable
Sāriputta, and exchanged greetings with him. When the
greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one side and
said to Sāriputta:

"Reverend Sāriputta, which is it? Is the eye the fetter of
sights, or are sights the fetter of the eye? Is the ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind the fetter of ideas, or are ideas the fetter of
the mind?"

"Reverend Koṭṭhita, the eye is not the fetter of sights,
nor are sights the fetter of the eye. The fetter there is the desire and
greed that arises from the pair of them. The ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind is not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of
the mind. The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the
pair of them.

Suppose there was a black ox and a white ox yoked by a single harness or
yoke. Would it be right to say that the black ox is the yoke of the
white ox, or the white ox is the yoke of the black ox?"

"No, reverend. The black ox is not the yoke of the white ox, nor is the
white ox the yoke of the black ox. The yoke there is the single harness
or yoke that they're yoked by."

"In the same way, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights
the fetter of the eye. The fetter there is the desire and greed that
arises from the pair of them. The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind is not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of the mind.
The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of
them.

If the eye were the fetter of sights, or if sights were the fetter of
the eye, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of
suffering would not be found. However, since this is not the case, but
the fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of
them, this living of the spiritual life for the complete ending of
suffering is found.

If the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind were the fetter of
ideas, or if ideas were the fetter of the mind, this living of the
spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering would not be found.
However, since this is not the case, but the fetter there is the desire
and greed that arises from the pair of them, this living of the
spiritual life for the complete ending of suffering is found.

This too is a way to understand how this is so.

The Buddha has an eye with which he sees a sight. But he has no desire
and greed, for his mind is well freed. The Buddha has an ear ... nose
... tongue ... The Buddha has a body with which he senses touch. But he
has no desire and greed, for his mind is well freed. The Buddha has a
mind

with which he knows ideas. But he has no desire and greed, for his mind
is well freed.

This too is a way to understand how the eye is not the fetter of sights,
nor are sights the fetter of the eye. The fetter there is the desire and
greed that arises from the pair of them. The ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind is not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of
the mind. The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the
pair of them."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.233 With Kāmabhū *Kāmabhūsutta*

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Kāmabhū were staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Kāmabhū came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, which is it? Is the eye the fetter of sights, or are
sights the fetter of the eye? Is the ear ... nose ... tongue ... body
... mind the fetter of ideas, or are ideas the fetter of the mind?"

"Reverend Kāmabhū, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor
are sights the fetter of the eye. The fetter there is the desire and
greed that arises from the pair of them. The ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind is not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of
the mind. The fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the
pair of them.

Suppose there was a black ox and a white ox yoked by a single harness or
yoke. Would it be right to say that the black ox is the yoke of the
white ox, or the white ox is the yoke of the black ox?"

"No, reverend. The black ox is not the yoke of the white ox, nor is the
white ox the yoke of the black ox. The yoke there is the single harness
or yoke that they're yoked by."

"In the same way, the eye is not the fetter of sights, nor are sights
the fetter of the eye. The ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is
not the fetter of ideas, nor are ideas the fetter of the mind. The
fetter there is the desire and greed that arises from the pair of them."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.234 With Udāyī *Udāyīsutta*

At one time the venerables Ānanda and Udāyī were staying
near Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Then in the late afternoon, Venerable Udāyī came out of
retreat, went to Venerable Ānanda, and exchanged greetings with him.
When the greetings and polite conversation were over, he sat down to one
side and said to Ānanda:

"Reverend Ānanda, the Buddha has explained, opened, and illuminated in
many ways how this body is not-self. Is it possible to explain
consciousness in the same way? To teach, assert, establish, clarify,
analyze, and reveal how consciousness is not-self?"

"It is possible, Reverend Udāyī.

Does eye consciousness arise dependent on the eye and sights?"

"Yes, reverend."

"If the cause and reason that gives rise to eye consciousness were to
totally and utterly cease without anything left over, would eye
consciousness still be found?"

"No, reverend."

"In this way, too, it can be understood how consciousness is not-self.

Does ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ... mind consciousness arise
dependent on the mind and ideas?"

"Yes, reverend."

"If the cause and reason that gives rise to mind consciousness were to
totally and utterly cease without anything left over, would mind
consciousness still be found?"

"No, reverend."

"In this way, too, it can be understood how consciousness is not-self.

Suppose there was a person in need of heartwood. Wandering in search of
heartwood, they'd take a sharp axe and enter a forest. There they'd see
a big banana tree, straight and young and grown free of defects. They'd
cut it down at the base, cut off the root, cut off the top, and unroll
the coiled sheaths. But they wouldn't even find sapwood, much less
heartwood.

In the same way, a mendicant sees these six fields of contact as neither
self nor belonging to self. So seeing, they don't grasp anything in the
world. Not grasping, they're not anxious. Not being anxious, they
personally become extinguished.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'"

<!--pg-->
### N 35.235 The Exposition on Burning *Ādittapariyāyasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you an exposition of the teaching on burning.
Listen ...

And what is the exposition of the teaching on burning?

You'd be better off mutilating your eye faculty with a red-hot iron
nail, burning, blazing and glowing, than getting caught up in the
features by way of the details in sights known by the eye. For if you
die at a time when your consciousness is still tied to gratification in
the features or details, it's possible you'll go to one of two
destinations: hell or the animal realm. I speak having seen this
drawback.

You'd be better off mutilating your ear faculty with a sharp iron spike
...

You'd be better off mutilating your nose faculty with a sharp nail
cutter ...

You'd be better off mutilating your tongue faculty with a sharp razor
...

You'd be better off mutilating your body faculty with a sharp spear,
burning, blazing and glowing, than getting caught up in the features by
way of the details in touches known by the body. For if you die at a
time when your consciousness is still tied to gratification in the
features or details, it's possible you'll go to one of two destinations:
hell or the animal realm. I speak having seen this drawback.

You'd be better off sleeping. For I say that sleep is useless,
fruitless, and unconsciousness for the living. But while you're asleep
you won't fall under the sway of such thoughts that would make you
create a schism in the Saṅgha. I speak having seen this
drawback.

A learned noble disciple reflects on this: 'Forget mutilating the eye
faculty with a red-hot iron nail, burning, blazing and glowing! I'd
better focus on the fact that the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and
eye contact are impermanent. And the painful, pleasant, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by eye contact is also impermanent.

Forget mutilating the ear faculty with a sharp iron spike, burning,
blazing and glowing! I'd better focus on the fact that the ear, sounds,
ear consciousness, and ear contact are impermanent. And the painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by ear contact is
also impermanent.

Forget mutilating the nose faculty with a sharp nail cutter, burning,
blazing and glowing! I'd better focus on the fact that the nose, smells,
nose consciousness, and nose contact are impermanent. And the painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by nose contact is
also impermanent.

Forget mutilating the tongue faculty with a sharp razor, burning,
blazing and glowing! I'd better focus on the fact that the tongue,
tastes, tongue consciousness, and tongue contact are impermanent. And
the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by
tongue contact is also impermanent.

Forget mutilating the body faculty with a sharp spear, burning, blazing
and glowing! I'd better focus on the fact that the body, touches, body
consciousness, and body contact are impermanent. And the painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by body contact is
also impermanent.

Forget sleeping! I'd better focus on the fact that the mind, ideas, mind
consciousness, and mind contact are impermanent. And the painful,
pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact is
also impermanent.'

Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye,
sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact. And they become
disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises
conditioned by eye contact. They grow disillusioned with the ear ...
nose ... tongue ... body ... mind ... painful, pleasant, or neutral
feeling that arises conditioned by mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they're
freed. When they're freed, they know they're freed.

They understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been
completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further
for this place.'

This is the exposition of the teaching on burning."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.236 The Simile of Hands and Feet (1st) *Paṭhamahatthapādopamasutta*

"Mendicants, when there are hands, picking up and putting down are
found. When there are feet, coming and going are found. When there are
joints, contracting and extending are found. When there's a belly,
hunger and thirst are found.

In the same way, when there's an eye, pleasure and pain arise internally
conditioned by eye contact. When there's an ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind, pleasure and pain arise internally conditioned by mind
contact.

When there are no hands, picking up and putting down aren't found. When
there are no feet, coming and going aren't found. When there are no
joints, contracting and extending aren't found. When there's no belly,
hunger and thirst aren't found.

In the same way, when there's no eye, pleasure and pain don't arise
internally conditioned by eye contact. When there's no ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind, pleasure and pain don't arise internally
conditioned by mind contact."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.237 The Simile of Hands and Feet (2nd) *Dutiyahatthapādopamasutta*

"Mendicants, when there are hands, there's picking up and putting down.
When there are feet, there's coming and going. When there are joints,
there's contracting and extending. When there's a belly, there's hunger
and thirst.

In the same way, when there's an eye, pleasure and pain arise internally
conditioned by eye contact. When there's an ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind, pleasure and pain arise internally conditioned by mind
contact.

When there are no hands, there's no picking up and putting down. When
there are no feet, there's no coming and going. When there are no
joints, there's no contracting and extending. When there's no belly,
there's no hunger and thirst.

In the same way, when there's no eye, pleasure and pain don't arise
internally conditioned by eye contact. When there's no ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind, pleasure and pain don't arise internally
conditioned by mind contact."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Simile of the Vipers

### N 35.238 The Simile of the Vipers *Āsīvisopamasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose there were four lethal poisonous vipers. Then a
person would come along who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who
wants to be happy and recoils from pain.

They'd say to him, 'Worthy man, here are four lethal poisonous vipers.
They must be periodically picked up, washed, fed, and put to sleep. But
when one or other of these four poisonous vipers gets angry with you,
you'll meet with death or deadly pain. So then, worthy man, do what has
to be done.'

Then that man, terrified of those four poisonous vipers, would flee this
way or that.

They'd say to him, 'Worthy man, there are five deadly enemies chasing
you, thinking: "When we catch sight of him, we'll murder him right
there!" So then, worthy man, do what has to be done.'

Then that man, terrified of those four poisonous vipers and those five
deadly enemies, would flee this way or that.

They'd say to him, 'Worthy man, there's a sixth hidden killer chasing
you with a drawn sword, thinking: "When I catch sight of him, I'll chop
off his head right there!" So then, worthy man, do what has to be done.'

Then that man, terrified of those four poisonous vipers and those five
deadly enemies and the hidden killer, would flee this way or that.

He'd see an empty village. But whatever house he enters is vacant,
deserted, and empty. And whatever vessel he touches is vacant, hollow,
and empty.

They'd say to him, 'Worthy man, there are bandits who raid villages, and
they're striking now. So then, worthy man, do what has to be done.'

Then that man, terrified of those four poisonous vipers and those five
deadly enemies and the hidden killer and the bandits, would flee this
way or that.

He'd see a large deluge, whose near shore is dubious and perilous, while
the far shore is a sanctuary free of peril. But there's no ferryboat or
bridge for crossing over.

Then that man thought, 'Why don't I gather grass, sticks, branches, and
leaves and make a raft? Riding on the raft, and paddling with my hands
and feet, I can safely reach the far shore.'

And so that man did exactly that. Having crossed over and gone beyond,
the brahmin stands on the far shore.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is the point.

'Four lethal poisonous vipers' is a term for the four principal states:
the elements of earth, water, fire, and air.

'Five deadly enemies' is a term for the five grasping aggregates, that
is: form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

'The sixth hidden killer with a drawn sword' is a term for relishing and
greed.

'Empty village' is a term for the six interior sense fields. If an
astute, competent, clever person investigates this in relation to the
eye, it appears vacant, hollow, and empty. If an astute, competent,
clever person investigates this in relation to the ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind, it appears vacant, hollow, and empty.

'Bandits who raid villages' is a term for the six exterior sense fields.
The eye is struck by both agreeable and disagreeable sights. The ear ...
nose ... tongue ... body ... mind is struck by both agreeable and
disagreeable ideas.

'Large deluge' is a term for the four floods: the floods of sensual
pleasures, desire to be reborn, views, and ignorance.

'The near shore that's dubious and perilous' is a term for substantial
reality.

'The far shore, a sanctuary free of peril' is a term for extinguishment.

'The raft' is a term for the noble eightfold path, that is: right view,
right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

'Paddling with hands and feet' is a term for rousing energy.

'Crossed over, gone beyond, the brahmin stands on the shore' is a term
for a perfected one."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.239 The Simile of the Chariot *Rathopamasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant has three qualities they're full of joy
and happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements. What three?

They guard the sense doors, eat in moderation, and are committed to
wakefulness.

And how does a mendicant guard the sense doors?

When a mendicant sees a sight with their eyes, they don't get caught up
in the features and details. If the faculty of sight were left
unrestrained, bad unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure
would become overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint,
protecting the faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, they don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, they practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

Suppose a chariot stood harnessed to thoroughbreds at a level
crossroads, with a goad ready. A deft horse trainer, a master
charioteer, might mount the chariot, taking the reins in his right hand
and goad in the left. He'd drive out and back wherever he wishes,
whenever he wishes.

In the same way, a mendicant trains to protect, control, tame, and
pacify these six senses.

That's how a mendicant guards the sense doors.

And how does a mendicant eat in moderation?

It's when a mendicant reflects rationally on the food that they eat:
'Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to sustain
this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In this
way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new
discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and
a comfortable abiding.'

It's like a person who puts ointment on a wound only so that it can
heal; or who oils an axle only so that it can carry a load.

In the same way, a mendicant reflects rationally on the food that they
eat: 'Not for fun, indulgence, adornment, or decoration, but only to
sustain this body, to avoid harm, and to support spiritual practice. In
this way, I shall put an end to old discomfort and not give rise to new
discomfort, and I will have the means to keep going, blamelessness, and
a comfortable abiding.'

That's how a mendicant eats in moderation.

And how is a mendicant committed to wakefulness?

It's when a mendicant practices walking and sitting meditation by day,
purifying their mind from obstacles. In the first watch of the night,
they continue to practice walking and sitting meditation. In the middle
watch, they lie down in the lion's posture---on the right side, placing
one foot on top of the other---mindful and aware, and focused on the
time of getting up. In the last watch, they get up and continue to
practice walking and sitting meditation, purifying their mind from
obstacles.

This is how a mendicant is committed to wakefulness.

When a mendicant has these three qualities they're full of joy and
happiness in this very life, and they have laid the groundwork for
ending the defilements."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.240 The Simile of the Tortoise *Kummopamasutta*

"Once upon a time, mendicants, a tortoise was grazing along the bank of
a river in the afternoon. At the same time, a jackal was also hunting
along the river bank. The tortoise saw the jackal off in the distance
hunting, so it drew its limbs and neck inside its shell, and kept
passive and silent.

But the jackal also saw the tortoise off in the distance grazing. So it
went up to the tortoise and waited nearby, thinking, 'When that tortoise
sticks one or other of its limbs or neck out from its shell, I'll grab
it right there, rip it out, and eat it!'

But when that tortoise didn't stick one or other of its limbs or neck
out from its shell, the jackal left disappointed, since it couldn't find
a vulnerability.

In the same way, Māra the Wicked is always waiting nearby,
thinking: 'Hopefully I can find a vulnerability in the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, body, or mind.' That's why you should live with sense doors
guarded.

When you see a sight with your eyes, don't get caught up in the features
and details. If the faculty of sight were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of sight, and achieving its restraint.

When you hear a sound with your ears ...

When you smell an odor with your nose ...

When you taste a flavor with your tongue ...

When you feel a touch with your body ...

When you know an idea with your mind, don't get caught up in the
features and details. If the faculty of mind were left unrestrained, bad
unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure would become
overwhelming. For this reason, practice restraint, protecting the
faculty of mind, and achieving its restraint.

When you live with your sense doors guarded, Māra will
leave you disappointed, since he can't find a vulnerability, just like
the jackal left the tortoise.

> A mendicant should collect their thoughts\
> as a tortoise draws its limbs into its shell.\
> Independent, not disturbing others,\
> quenched: they wouldn't blame anyone."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.241 The Simile of the Tree Trunk (1st) *Paṭhamadārukkhandhopamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī on the bank
of the Ganges river.

Seeing a large tree trunk being carried along by the current, he
addressed the mendicants, "Mendicants, do you see that large tree trunk
being carried along by the current of the Ganges river?"

"Yes, sir."

"Mendicants, assume that that tree trunk doesn't collide with the near
shore or the far shore, or sink in the middle, or get stranded on high
ground. And assume that it doesn't get taken by humans or non-humans or
caught up in a whirlpool, and that it doesn't rot away. In that case,
that tree trunk will slant, slope, and incline towards the ocean. Why is
that? Because the current of the Ganges river slants, slopes, and
inclines towards the ocean.

In the same way, assume that you don't collide with the near shore or
the far shore, or sink in the middle, or get stranded on high ground.
And assume that you don't get taken by humans or non-humans or caught up
in a whirlpool, and that you don't rot away. In that case, you will
slant, slope, and incline towards extinguishment. Why is that? Because
right view slants, slopes, and inclines towards extinguishment."

When he said this, one of the mendicants asked the Buddha:

"But sir, what's the near shore and what's the far shore? What's sinking
in the middle? What's getting stranded on high ground? What's getting
taken by humans or non-humans? What's getting caught up in a whirlpool?
And what's rotting away?"

"'The near shore', mendicant, is a term for the six interior sense
fields.

'The far shore' is a term for the six exterior sense fields.

'Sinking in the middle' is a term for greed and relishing.

'Stranded on high ground' is a term for the conceit 'I am'.

And what's getting taken by humans? It's when someone mixes closely with
laypeople, sharing their joys and sorrows---happy when they're happy and
sad when they're sad---and getting involved in their business. That's
called getting taken by humans.

And what's getting taken by non-humans? It's when someone leads the
spiritual life wishing to be reborn in one of the orders of gods: 'By
this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual life, may I
become one of the gods!' That's called getting taken by non-humans.
'Caught up in a whirlpool' is a term for the five kinds of sensual
stimulation.

And what's rotting away? It's when some person is unethical, of bad
qualities, filthy, with suspicious behavior, underhand, no true ascetic
or spiritual practitioner---though claiming to be one---rotten inside,
festering, and depraved. This is called 'rotting away'."

Now at that time Nanda the cowherd was sitting not far from the Buddha.
Then he said to the Buddha:

"I won't collide with the near shore or the far shore, or sink in the
middle, or get stranded on high ground. And I won't get taken by humans
or non-humans or caught up in a whirlpool, and I won't rot away. Sir,
may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

"Well then, Nanda, return the cows to their owners."

"Sir, the cows will go back by themselves, since they love their
calves."

"Still, Nanda, you should return them to their owners."

Then Nanda, after returning the cows to their owners, went up to the
Buddha and said to him, "Sir, I have returned the cows to their owners.
May I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

And the cowherd Nanda received the going forth, the ordination in the
Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination, Venerable Nanda became
one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.242 The Simile of the Tree Trunk (2nd) *Dutiyadārukkhandhopamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kimibilā on the
bank of the Ganges river. Seeing a large tree trunk being carried along
by the current, he addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, do you see
that large tree trunk being carried along by the current of the Ganges
river?"

"Yes, sir," they replied. ... When this was said, Venerable Kimbila said
to the Buddha:

"But sir, what's the near shore and what's the far shore? What's sinking
in the middle? What's getting stranded on high ground? What's getting
taken by humans or non-humans? What's getting caught up in a whirlpool?
And what's rotting away?" ...

"And what, Kimbila, is rotting away? It's when a mendicant has committed
the kind of corrupt offense for which no resolution is possible. This is
called 'rotting away'."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.243 The Explanation on the Festering *Avassutapariyāyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sakyans, near
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Tree Monastery. Now at that time a new town
hall had recently been constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It
had not yet been occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any person at all.

Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him, "Sir, a new town hall has recently been
constructed for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu. It has not yet been
occupied by an ascetic or brahmin or any person at all. May the Buddha
be the first to use it, and only then will the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu
use it. That would be for the lasting welfare and happiness of the
Sakyans of Kapilavatthu." The Buddha consented with silence.

Knowing that the Buddha had consented, the Sakyans got up from their
seat, bowed, and respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their
right. Then they went to the new town hall, where they spread carpets
all over, prepared seats, set up a water jar, and placed an oil lamp.
Then they went back to the Buddha and told him of their preparations,
saying, "Please, sir, come at your convenience."

Then the Buddha robed up and, taking his bowl and robe, went to the new
town hall together with the Saṅgha of mendicants. Having
washed his feet he entered the town hall and sat against the central
column facing east. The Saṅgha of mendicants also washed
their feet, entered the town hall, and sat against the west wall facing
east, with the Buddha right in front of them. The Sakyans of
Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, entered the town hall, and sat
against the east wall facing west, with the Buddha right in front of
them. The Buddha spent much of the night educating, encouraging, firing
up, and inspiring the Sakyans with a Dhamma talk. Then he dismissed
them, saying, "The night is getting late, Gotamas. Please go at your
convenience."

"Yes, sir," replied the Sakyans. They got up from their seat, bowed, and
respectfully circled the Buddha, keeping him on their right, before
leaving.

And then, soon after the Sakyans had left, the Buddha addressed
Venerable Mahāmoggallāna, "Moggallāna, the
Saṅgha of mendicants is rid of dullness and drowsiness.
Give them some Dhamma talk as you feel inspired. My back is sore, I'll
stretch it."

"Yes, sir," Mahāmoggallāna replied. And then the Buddha
spread out his outer robe folded in four and laid down in the lion's
posture---on the right side, placing one foot on top of the
other---mindful and aware, and focused on the time of getting up.

There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the mendicants:
"Reverends, mendicants!"

"Reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said
this:

"I will teach you the explanation of the festering and the not
festering. Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, reverend," they replied. Venerable Mahāmoggallāna
said this:

"And how is someone festering?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it's pleasant they
hold on to it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart restricted. And
they don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

They hear a sound ... smell an odor ... taste a flavor ... feel a touch
... know an idea with the mind. If it's pleasant they hold on to it, but
if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the
body unestablished and a limited heart. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad,
unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

This is called a mendicant who is festering when it comes to sights
known by the eye, sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind.

When a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them
through the eye he finds a vulnerability and gets hold of them. If
Māra comes at them through the ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind he finds a vulnerability and gets hold of them.

Suppose there was a house made of reeds or straw that was dried up,
withered, and decrepit. If a person came to it with a burning grass
torch from the east, west, north, south, below, above, or from anywhere,
the fire would find a vulnerability, it would get a foothold.

In the same way, when a mendicant lives like this, if Māra
comes at them through the eye he finds a vulnerability and gets hold of
them. If Māra comes at them through the ear ... nose ...
tongue ... body ... mind he finds a vulnerability and gets hold of them.

When a mendicant lives like this, they're mastered by sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, touches, and ideas, they don't master these things.

This is called a mendicant who has been mastered by sights, sounds,
smells, tastes, touches, and ideas. They're mastered, not a master. Bad,
unskillful qualities have mastered them, which are corrupting, leading
to future lives, hurtful, and resulting in suffering and future rebirth,
old age, and death.

That's how someone is festering.

And how is someone not festering?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it's pleasant they
don't hold on to it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They
live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And
they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

They hear a sound ... smell an odor ... taste a flavor ... feel a touch
... know an idea with the mind. If it's pleasant they don't hold on to
it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And they
truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those
arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

This is called a mendicant who is not festering when it comes to sights
known by the eye, sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas
known by the mind.

When a mendicant lives like this, if Māra comes at them
through the eye he doesn't find a vulnerability or get hold of them. If
Māra comes at them through the ear ... nose ... tongue ...
body ... mind he doesn't find a vulnerability or get hold of them.

Suppose there was a bungalow or hall made of thick clay with its plaster
still wet. If a person came to it with a burning grass torch from the
east, west, north, south, below, above, or from anywhere, the fire
wouldn't find a vulnerability, it would get no foothold.

In the same way, when a mendicant lives like this, if Māra
comes at them through the eye he doesn't find a vulnerability or get
hold of them. If Māra comes at them through the ear ...
nose ... tongue ... body ... mind he doesn't find a vulnerability or get
hold of them.

When a mendicant lives like this, they master sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas, they're not mastered by these things.

This is called a mendicant who has mastered sights, sounds, smells,
tastes, touches, and ideas. They're a master, not mastered. Bad,
unskillful qualities have been mastered by them, which are corrupting,
leading to future lives, hurtful, and resulting in suffering and future
rebirth, old age, and death.

That's how someone is not festering."

Then the Buddha got up and said to Venerable
Mahāmoggallāna:

"Good, good, Moggallāna! It's good that you've taught this
explanation of the festering and the not festering."

This is what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said, and the teacher
approved. Satisfied, the mendicants approved what
Mahāmoggallāna said.

<!--pg-->
### N 35.244 Entailing Suffering *Dukkhadhammasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant truly understands the origin and ending of
all things that entail suffering, then they've seen sensual pleasures in
such a way that they have no underlying tendency for desire, affection,
infatuation, and passion for sensual pleasures. And they've awakened to
a way of conduct and a way of living such that, when they live in that
way, bad, unskillful qualities of covetousness and displeasure don't
overwhelm them.

And how does a mendicant truly understand the origin and ending of all
things that entail suffering?

'Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the ending of form.
Such is feeling ... perception ... choices ... consciousness, such is
the origin of consciousness, such is the ending of consciousness.'

That's how a mendicant truly understands the origin and ending of all
things that entail suffering.

And how has a mendicant seen sensual pleasures in such a way that they
have no underlying tendency for desire, affection, infatuation, and
passion for sensual pleasures?

Suppose there was a pit of glowing coals deeper than a man's height,
filled with glowing coals that neither flamed nor smoked. Then a person
would come along who wants to live and doesn't want to die, who wants to
be happy and recoils from pain. Two strong men would grab each arm and
drag them towards the pit of glowing coals. They'd writhe and struggle
to and fro. Why is that? For that person knows, 'If I fall in that pit
of glowing coals, that will result in my death or deadly pain.'

In the same way, when a mendicant has seen sensual pleasures as like a
pit of glowing coals, they have no underlying tendency for desire,
affection, infatuation, and passion for sensual pleasures.

And how has a mendicant awakened to a way of conduct and a way of living
such that, when they live in that way, bad, unskillful qualities of
covetousness and displeasure don't overwhelm them?

Suppose a person was to enter a thicket full of thorns. They'd have
thorns before and behind, to the left and right, below and above. So
they'd go forward mindfully and come back mindfully, thinking, 'May I
not get any thorns!'

In the same way, whatever in the world seems nice and pleasant is called
a thorn in the training of the Noble One. When they understand what a
thorn is, they should understand restraint and lack of restraint.

And how is someone unrestrained?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it's pleasant they
hold on to it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart restricted. And
they don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

They hear a sound ... smell an odor ... taste a flavor ... feel a touch
... know an idea with the mind. If it's pleasant they hold on to it, but
if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness of the
body unestablished and a limited heart. And they don't truly understand
the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen bad,
unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

This is how someone is unrestrained.

And how is someone restrained?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with the eye. If it's pleasant they
don't hold on to it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They
live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And
they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

They hear a sound ... smell an odor ... taste a flavor ... feel a touch
... know an idea with the mind. If it's pleasant they don't hold on to
it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And they
truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those
arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

This is how someone is restrained.

Perhaps while that mendicant is conducting themselves and living in this
way, bad, unskillful memories and thoughts prone to fetters arise every
so often due to loss of mindfulness. Slowly mindfulness arises, but then
they quickly give up, get rid of, eliminate, and obliterate those
thoughts.

Suppose there was an iron cauldron that had been heated all day, and a
person let two or three drops of water fall onto it. Slowly the drops
fall, but then they quickly dry up and evaporate.

In the same way, perhaps while that mendicant is conducting themselves
and living in this way, bad, unskillful memories and thoughts prone to
fetters arise every so often due to loss of mindfulness. Slowly
mindfulness arises, but then they quickly give up, get rid of,
eliminate, and obliterate those thoughts.

This is how a mendicant has awakened to a way of conduct and a way of
living such that, when they live in that way, bad, unskillful qualities
of covetousness and displeasure don't overwhelm them.

While that mendicant conducts themselves in this way and lives in this
way, it may be that rulers or their chief ministers, friends or
colleagues, relatives or family would invite them to accept wealth,
saying, 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment you? Why
follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms bowl?
Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!' But it is
quite impossible for a mendicant who conducts themselves in this way and
lives in this way to resign the training and return to a lesser life.

Suppose that, although the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to
the east, a large crowd were to come along with a spade and basket,
saying: 'We'll make this Ganges river slant, slope, and incline to the
west!'

What do you think, mendicants? Would they still succeed?"

"No, sir. Why is that? The Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to
the east. It's not easy to make it slant, slope, and incline to the
west. That large crowd will eventually get weary and frustrated."

"In the same way, while that mendicant conducts themselves in this way
and lives in this way, it may be that rulers or their chief ministers,
friends or colleagues, relatives or family should invite them to accept
wealth, saying, 'Please, worthy man, why let these ocher robes torment
you? Why follow the practice of shaving your head and carrying an alms
bowl? Come, return to a lesser life, enjoy wealth, and make merit!' But
it is quite impossible for a mendicant who conducts themselves in this
way and lives in this way to resign the training and return to a lesser
life.

Why is that? Because for a long time that mendicant's mind has slanted,
sloped, and inclined to seclusion. So it's impossible for them to return
to a lesser life."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.245 The Simile of the Parrot Tree *Kiṁsukopamasutta*

Then one mendicant went up to another mendicant and asked, "Reverend, at
what point is a mendicant's vision well purified?"

"When a mendicant truly understands the origin and ending of the six
fields of contact, at that point their vision is well purified."

Not content with that answer, that mendicant went up to a series of
other mendicants and received the following answers:

"When a mendicant truly understands the origin and ending of the five
grasping aggregates, at that point their vision is well purified."

"When a mendicant truly understands the origin and ending of the four
principal states, at that point their vision is well purified."

"When a mendicant truly understands that everything that has a beginning
has an end, at that point their vision is well purified."

Not content with any of those answers, that mendicant went up to the
Buddha and told him what had happened. Then he asked, "Sir, at what
point is a mendicant's vision well purified?"

"Mendicant, suppose a person had never seen a parrot tree. They'd go up
to someone who had seen a parrot tree and ask them, 'Worthy man, what's
a parrot tree like?'

They'd say, 'A parrot tree is blackish, like a charred stump.' Now, at
that time a parrot tree may well have been just as that person saw it.

Not content with that answer, that person would go up to a series of
other people and receive the following answers: 'A parrot tree is
reddish, like a scrap of meat.' 'A parrot tree has flaking bark and
burst pods, like a sirisa.' 'A parrot tree has luxuriant, shady foliage,
like a banyan.' Now, at each of those times a parrot tree may well have
been just as those people saw them.

In the same way, those true persons each answered according to what they
were focused on when their vision was well purified.

Suppose there was a king's frontier citadel with fortified embankments,
ramparts, and arches, and six gates. And it has a gatekeeper who is
astute, competent, and clever. He keeps strangers out and lets known
people in.

A swift pair of messengers would arrive from the east and say to the
gatekeeper, 'Worthy man, where is the lord of the city?'

They'd say, 'There he is, sirs, seated at the central square.'

Then that swift pair of messengers would deliver a message of truth to
the lord of the city and depart the way they came.

A swift pair of messengers would come from the west ... north ... south
... deliver a message of truth to the lord of the city and depart the
way they came.

I've made up this simile to make a point. And this is the point.

'City' is a term for this body made up of the four principal states,
produced by mother and father, built up from rice and porridge, liable
to impermanence, to wearing away and erosion, to breaking up and
destruction.

'Six gates' is a term for the six interior sense fields.

'Gatekeeper' is a term for mindfulness.

'A swift pair of messengers' is a term for serenity and discernment.

'The lord of the city' is a term for consciousness.

'The central square' is a term for the four principal states: the
elements of earth, water, fire, and air.

'A message of truth' is a term for extinguishment.

'The way they came' is a term for the noble eightfold path, that is,
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.246 The Simile of the Harp *Vīṇopamasutta*

"Mendicants, any monk or nun who has desire or greed or hate or delusion
or repulsion come up for sights known by the eye should shield their
mind from them: 'This path is dangerous and perilous, thorny and
tangled; it's a wrong turn, a bad path, a harmful way. This path is
frequented by untrue persons, not by true persons. It's not worthy of
you.' The mind should be shielded from this when it comes to sights
known by the eye.

Any monk or nun who has desire or greed or hate or delusion or repulsion
come up for sounds ... smells ... tastes ... touches ... ideas known by
the mind should shield their mind against them: 'This path is dangerous
and perilous, thorny and tangled; it's a wrong turn, a bad path, a
harmful way. This path is frequented by untrue persons, not by true
persons. It's not worthy of you.' The mind should be shielded from this
when it comes to ideas known by the mind.

Suppose the crops have ripened, but the caretaker is negligent. If an ox
fond of crops invades the crops they'd indulge themselves as much as
they like.

In the same way, when an unlearned ordinary person doesn't exercise
restraint when it comes to the six fields of contact, they indulge
themselves in the five kinds of sensual stimulation as much as they
like.

Suppose the crops have ripened, and the caretaker is diligent. If an ox
fond of crops invades the crops the caretaker would grab them firmly by
the muzzle. Then they'd grab them above the hump and hold them fast
there. Then they'd give them a good thrashing before driving them away.
For a second time, and even a third time, the same thing might happen.
As a result, no matter how long they stand or sit in a village or
wilderness, that ox fond of crops would never invade that crop again,
remembering the beating they got earlier.

In the same way, when a mendicant's mind is subdued, well subdued when
it comes to the six fields of contact, becomes stilled internally; it
settles, unifies, and becomes immersed in samādhi.

Suppose a king or their chief minister had never heard the sound of an
arched harp. When he first hears the sound, he'd say, 'My man, what is
making this sound, so arousing, sensuous, intoxicating, infatuating, and
captivating?'

They'd say to him, 'That, sir, is an arched harp.'

He'd say, 'Go, my man, fetch me that arched harp.'

So they'd fetch it and say, 'This, sir, is that arched harp.'

He'd say, 'I've had enough of that arched harp! Just fetch me the
sound.'

They'd say, 'Sir, this arched harp is made of many components assembled
together, which make a sound when they're played. That is, it depends on
the body, the skin, the neck, the head, the strings, the plectrum, and a
person to play it properly. That's how an arched harp is made of many
components assembled together, which make a sound when they're played.'

But he'd split that harp into ten pieces or a hundred pieces, then
splinter it up. He'd burn the splinters with fire, and reduce them to
ashes. Then he'd sweep away the ashes in a strong wind, or float them
away down a swift stream.

Then he'd say, 'It seems that there's nothing to this thing called an
arched harp or whatever's called an arched harp! But people waste their
time with it, negligent and heedless!'

In the same way, a mendicant searches for form, feeling, perception,
choices, and consciousness anywhere they might be reborn. As they search
in this way, their ideas of 'I' or 'mine' or 'I am' are no more."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.247 The Simile of Six Animals *Chappāṇakopamasutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a person with wounded and festering limbs was to
enter a thicket of thorny reeds. The kusa thorns would pierce their
feet, and the reed leaves would scratch their limbs. And that would
cause that person to experience even more pain and distress.

In the same way, some mendicant goes to a village or a wilderness and
gets scolded, 'This venerable, acting like this, behaving like this, is
a filthy village thorn.' Understanding that they're a thorn, they should
understand restraint and lack of restraint.

And how is someone unrestrained?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it's pleasant they
hold on to it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body unestablished and their heart restricted. And
they don't truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
where those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left
over.

When they hear a sound with their ears ...

When they smell an odor with their nose ...

When they taste a flavor with their tongue ...

When they feel a touch with their body ...

When they know an idea with their mind, if it's pleasant they hold on to
it, but if it's unpleasant they dislike it. They live with mindfulness
of the body unestablished and a limited heart. And they don't truly
understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those arisen
bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and
feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. They'd catch a
snake, a crocodile, a bird, a dog, a jackal, and a monkey, tie each up
with a strong rope, then tie a knot in the middle and let them loose.

Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull
towards their own domain and range. The snake would pull one way,
thinking 'I'm going into a termite mound!' The crocodile would pull
another way, thinking 'I'm going into the water!' The bird would pull
another way, thinking 'I'm flying into the atmosphere!' The dog would
pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the village!' The jackal
would pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the charnel ground!'
The monkey would pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the jungle!'
When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, the strongest of
them would get their way, and they'd all have to submit to their
control.

In the same way, when a mendicant has not developed or cultivated
mindfulness of the body, their eye pulls towards pleasant sights, but is
put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear ... nose ... tongue ... body ...
mind pulls towards pleasant ideas, but is put off by unpleasant ideas.

This is how someone is unrestrained.

And how is someone restrained?

Take a mendicant who sees a sight with their eyes. If it's pleasant they
don't hold on to it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They
live with mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And
they truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where
those arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

They hear a sound ... smell an odor ... taste a flavor ... feel a touch
... know an idea with their mind. If it's pleasant they don't hold on to
it, and if it's unpleasant they don't dislike it. They live with
mindfulness of the body established and a limitless heart. And they
truly understand the freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom where those
arisen bad, unskillful qualities cease without anything left over.

Suppose a person was to catch six animals, with diverse territories and
feeding grounds, and tie them up with a strong rope. They'd catch a
snake, a crocodile, a bird, a dog, a jackal, and a monkey, tie each up
with a strong rope, then tether them to a strong post or pillar.

Then those six animals with different domains and ranges would each pull
towards their own domain and range. The snake would pull one way,
thinking 'I'm going into a termite mound!' The crocodile would pull
another way, thinking 'I'm going into the water!' The bird would pull
another way, thinking 'I'm flying into the atmosphere!' The dog would
pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the village!' The jackal
would pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the charnel ground!'
The monkey would pull another way, thinking 'I'm going into the jungle!'
When those six animals became exhausted and worn out, they'd stand or
sit or lie down right by that post or pillar.

In the same way, when a mendicant has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, their eye doesn't pull towards pleasant sights,
and isn't put off by unpleasant sights. Their ear ... nose ... tongue
... body ... mind doesn't pull towards pleasant ideas, and isn't put off
by unpleasant ideas. This is how someone is restrained.

'A strong post or pillar' is a term for mindfulness of the body.

So you should train like this: 'We will develop mindfulness of the body.
We'll cultivate it, make it our vehicle and our basis, keep it up,
consolidate it, and properly implement it.' That's how you should
train."

<!--pg-->
### N 35.248 The Sheaf of Barley *Yavakalāpisutta*

"Mendicants, suppose a sheaf of barley was placed at a crossroads. Then
six people would come along carrying flails, and started threshing the
sheaf of barley. So that sheaf of barley would be thoroughly threshed by
those six flails. Then a seventh person would come along carrying a
flail, and they'd give the sheaf of barley a seventh threshing. So that
sheaf of barley would be even more thoroughly threshed by that seventh
flail.

In the same way, an unlearned ordinary person is struck in the eye by
both pleasant and unpleasant sights. They're struck in the ear ... nose
... tongue ... body ... mind by both pleasant and unpleasant ideas. And
if that unlearned ordinary person has intentions regarding rebirth into
a new state of existence in the future, that futile person is even more
thoroughly struck, like that sheaf of barley threshed by the seventh
person.

Once upon a time, a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.
Then Vepacitti, lord of titans, addressed the titans, 'My good fellows,
if the titans defeat the gods in this battle, bind Sakka, the lord of
gods, by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the citadel
of the titans.'

Meanwhile, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed the gods of the thirty-three,
'My good fellows, if the gods defeat the titans in this battle, bind
Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and bring him to my presence in the Hall
of Justice of the gods.'

In that battle the gods won and the titans lost. So the gods of the
thirty-three bound Vepacitti by his limbs and neck and brought him to
Sakka's presence in the Hall of Justice of the gods.

And there Vepacitti remained bound by his limbs and neck. That is, until
he thought, 'It's the gods who are principled, while the titans are
unprincipled. Now I belong right here in the castle of the gods.' Then
he found himself freed from the bonds on his limbs and neck. He
entertained himself, supplied and provided with the five kinds of
heavenly sensual stimulation.

But when he thought, 'It's the titans who are principled, while the gods
are unprincipled. Now I will go over there to the citadel of the
titans,' he found himself bound by his limbs and neck, and the five
kinds of heavenly sensual stimulation disappeared.

That's how subtly Vepacitti was bound. But the bonds of
Māra are even more subtle than that. When you conceive,
you're bound by Māra. Not conceiving, you're free from the
Wicked One.

These are all forms of conceiving: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I
will not be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be
percipient', 'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient
nor non-percipient.' Conceit is a disease, a boil, a dart. So
mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: 'We will live with a
heart that does not conceive.'

These are all disturbances: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will
not be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be
percipient', 'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient
nor non-percipient.' Disturbances are a disease, a boil, a dart. So
mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: 'We will live with a
heart free of disturbances.'

These are all tremblings: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will not
be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be percipient',
'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient nor
non-percipient.' Trembling is a disease, a boil, a dart. So mendicants,
you should train yourselves like this: 'We will live with a heart free
of tremblings.'

These are all proliferations: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will
not be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be
percipient', 'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient
nor non-percipient.' Proliferation is a disease, a boil, a dart. So
mendicants, you should train yourselves like this: 'We will live with a
heart free of proliferation.'

These are all conceits: 'I am', 'I am this', 'I will be', 'I will not
be', 'I will have form', 'I will be formless', 'I will be percipient',
'I will be non-percipient', 'I will be neither percipient nor
non-percipient.' Conceit is a disease, a boil, a dart. So mendicants,
you should train yourselves like this: 'We will live with a heart that
has struck down conceit.'"



