# Linked Discourses with Chiefs

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Chiefs

### SN 42.1 Vicious *Caṇḍasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then the chief named Fury went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and said to him:

"What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why some people are regarded
as furious, while others are regarded as sweet-natured?"

"Take someone who hasn't given up greed. So they get annoyed by others,
and they show it. They're regarded as furious. They haven't given up
hate. So they get annoyed by others, and they show it. They're regarded
as furious. They haven't given up delusion. So they get annoyed by
others, and they show it. They're regarded as furious. This is the
cause, this is the reason why some people are regarded as furious.

But take someone who has given up greed. So they don't get annoyed by
others, and don't show it. They're regarded as sweet-natured. They've
given up hate. So they don't get annoyed by others, and don't show it.
They're regarded as sweet-natured. They've given up delusion. So they
don't get annoyed by others, and don't show it. They're regarded as
sweet-natured. This is the cause, this is the reason why some people are
regarded as sweet-natured."

When he said this, the chief named Fury said to the Buddha, "Excellent,
sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or revealing the
hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting a lamp in the
dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the Buddha has made
the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the Buddha, to the
teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. From this day forth,
may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for
life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.2 With Tālapuṭa *Tālapuṭasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Then Tālapuṭa
the dancing master came up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side,
and said to the Buddha:

"Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were tutors of
tutors said: 'Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage
or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of laughing gods.' What does the
Buddha say about this?"

"Enough, chief, let it be. Don't ask me that."

For a second time ...

And for a third time Tālapuṭa said to the Buddha:

"Sir, I have heard that the dancers of the past who were tutors of
tutors said: 'Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses people on a stage
or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body breaks up, after
death, they're reborn in the company of laughing gods.' What does the
Buddha say about this?"

"Clearly, chief, I'm not getting through to you when I say: 'Enough,
chief, let it be. Don't ask me that.' Nevertheless, I will answer you.

When sentient beings are still not free of greed, and are still bound by
greed, a dancer in a stage or festival presents them with even more
arousing things. When sentient beings are still not free of hate, and
are still bound by hate, a dancer in a stage or festival presents them
with even more hateful things. When sentient beings are still not free
of delusion, and are still bound by delusion, a dancer in a stage or
festival presents them with even more delusory things. And so, being
heedless and negligent themselves, they've encouraged others to be
heedless and negligent. When their body breaks up, after death, they're
reborn in the hell called 'Laughter'.

But if you have such a view: 'Suppose a dancer entertains and amuses
people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of laughing gods.'
This is your wrong view. An individual with wrong view is reborn in one
of two places, I say: hell or the animal realm."

When he said this, Tālapuṭa cried and burst out in tears.

"This is what I didn't get through to you when I said: 'Enough, chief,
let it be. Don't ask me that.'"

"Sir, I'm not crying because of what the Buddha said. But sir, for a
long time I've been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the dancers of the
past who were tutors of tutors, who said: 'Suppose a dancer entertains
and amuses people on a stage or at a festival with truth and lies. When
their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in the company of
laughing gods.'

Excellent, sir! Excellent! As if he were righting the overturned, or
revealing the hidden, or pointing out the path to the lost, or lighting
a lamp in the dark so people with clear eyes can see what's there, the
Buddha has made the teaching clear in many ways. I go for refuge to the
Buddha, to the teaching, and to the mendicant Saṅgha. Sir,
may I receive the going forth, the ordination in the Buddha's presence?"

And the dancing master Tālapuṭa received the going forth,
the ordination in the Buddha's presence. Not long after his ordination,
Venerable Tālapuṭa became one of the perfected.

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.3 A Warrior *Yodhājīvasutta*

Then Dustin the warrior chief went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were tutors of
tutors said: 'Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in
battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up,
after death, he's reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.' What
does the Buddha say about this?"

"Enough, chief, let it be. Don't ask me that."

For a second time ...

And for a third time the warrior chief said to the Buddha:

"Sir, I have heard that the warriors of the past who were tutors of
tutors said: 'Suppose a warrior, while striving and struggling in
battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his body breaks up,
after death, he's reborn in the company of the gods of the fallen.' What
does the Buddha say about this?"

"Clearly, chief, I'm not getting through to you when I say: 'Enough,
chief, let it be. Don't ask me that.' Nevertheless, I will answer you.

When a warrior strives and struggles in battle, their mind is already
low, degraded, and misdirected as they think: 'May these sentient beings
be killed, slaughtered, slain, destroyed, or annihilated!' His foes kill
him and finish him off, and when his body breaks up, after death, he's
reborn in the hell called 'The Fallen'.

But if you have such a view: 'Suppose a warrior, while striving and
struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his foes. When his
body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in the company of the gods of
the fallen.' This is your wrong view. An individual with wrong view is
reborn in one of two places, I say: hell or the animal realm."

When he said this, Dustin the warrior chief cried and burst out in
tears.

"This is what I didn't get through to you when I said: 'Enough, chief,
let it be. Don't ask me that.'"

"Sir, I'm not crying because of what the Buddha said. But sir, for a
long time I've been cheated, tricked, and deceived by the warriors of
the past who were tutors of tutors, who said: 'Suppose a warrior, while
striving and struggling in battle, is killed and finished off by his
foes. When his body breaks up, after death, he's reborn in the company
of the gods of the fallen.'

Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.4 An Elephant Warrior *Hatthārohasutta*

Then an elephant warrior chief went up to the Buddha ... "From this day
forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who has gone for
refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.5 A Cavalryman *Assārohasutta*

Then a cavalry chief went up to the Buddha ...

"From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as a lay follower who
has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.6 With Asibandhaka's Son *Asibandhakaputtasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove.

Then Asibandhaka's son the chief went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down
to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, there are western brahmins draped with moss who carry pitchers,
immerse themselves in water, and serve the sacred flame. When someone
has passed away, they truly lift them up, raise them up, and guide them
along to heaven. But what about the Blessed One, the perfected one, the
fully awakened Buddha: is he able to ensure that the whole world will be
reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm when their body breaks up,
after death?"

"Well then, chief, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer
as you like.

What do you think, chief? Take a person who kills living creatures,
steals, and commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, and
have wrong view. And a large crowd comes together to offer up prayers
and praise, circumambulating them with joined palms and saying: 'When
this person's body breaks up, after death, may they be reborn in a good
place, a heavenly realm!' What do you think, chief? Would that person be
reborn in heaven because of their prayers?"

"No, sir."

"Chief, suppose a person were to throw a broad rock into a deep lake.
And a large crowd was to come together to offer up prayers and praise,
circumambulating it with joined palms, and saying: 'Rise, good rock!
Float, good rock! Float to shore, good rock!' What do you think, chief?
Would that broad rock rise up or float because of their prayers?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, take a person who kills living creatures, steals, and
commits sexual misconduct. They use speech that's false, divisive,
harsh, or nonsensical. And they're covetous, malicious, and have wrong
view. Even though a large crowd comes together to offer up prayers and
praise ... when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a
place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

What do you think, chief? Take a person who doesn't kill living
creatures, steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech
that's false, divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented,
kind-hearted, and have right view. And a large crowd comes together to
offer up prayers and praise, circumambulating them with joined palms and
saying: 'When this person's body breaks up, after death, may they be
reborn in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell!' What do
you think, chief? Would that person be reborn in hell because of their
prayers?"

"No, sir."

"Chief, suppose a person were to sink a pot of ghee or oil into a deep
lake and break it open. Its shards and chips would sink down, while the
ghee or oil in it would rise up. And a large crowd was to come together
to offer up prayers and praise, circumambulating it with joined palms
and saying: 'Sink, good ghee or oil! Descend, good ghee or oil! Go down,
good ghee or oil!' What do you think, chief? Would that ghee or oil sink
and descend because of their prayers?"

"No, sir."

"In the same way, take a person who doesn't kill living creatures,
steal, or commit sexual misconduct. They don't use speech that's false,
divisive, harsh, or nonsensical. And they're contented, kind-hearted,
and have right view. Even though a large crowd comes together to offer
up prayers and praise ... when their body breaks up, after death,
they're reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm."

When he said this, Asibandhaka's son the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha remember me as
a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.7 The Simile of the Field *Khettūpamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove. Then Asibandhaka's son the chief
went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, doesn't the Buddha live full of sympathy for all living beings?"

"Yes, chief."

"Well, sir, why exactly do you teach some people thoroughly and others
less thoroughly?"

"Well then, chief, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer
as you like. What do you think? Suppose a farmer has three fields: one's
good, one's average, and one's poor---bad ground of sand and salt. What
do you think? When that farmer wants to plant seeds, where would he
plant them first: the good field, the average one, or the poor one?"

"Sir, he'd plant them first in the good field, then the average, then he
may or may not plant seed in the poor field. Why is that? Because at
least it can be fodder for the cattle."

"To me, the monks and nuns are like the good field. I teach them the
Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased. And I reveal a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. Why is that? Because they live with me as
their island, protection, shelter, and refuge.

To me, the laymen and laywomen are like the average field. I also teach
them the Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and
good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And I reveal a spiritual
practice that's entirely full and pure. Why is that? Because they live
with me as their island, protection, shelter, and refuge.

To me, the ascetics, brahmins, and wanderers of other religions are like
the poor field, the bad ground of sand and salt. I also teach them the
Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the
end, meaningful and well-phrased. And I reveal a spiritual practice
that's entirely full and pure. Why is that? Hopefully they might
understand even a single sentence, which would be for their lasting
welfare and happiness.

Suppose a person had three water jars: one that's uncracked and
nonporous; one that's uncracked but porous; and one that's cracked and
porous. What do you think? When that person wants to store water, where
would they store it first: in the jar that's uncracked and nonporous,
the one that's uncracked but porous, or the one that's cracked and
porous?"

"Sir, they'd store water first in the jar that's uncracked and
nonporous, then the one that's uncracked but porous, then they may or
may not store water in the one that's cracked and porous. Why is that?
Because at least it can be used for washing the dishes."

"To me, the monks and nuns are like the water jar that's uncracked and
nonporous. I teach them the Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And I
reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. Why is that?
Because they live with me as their island, protection, shelter, and
refuge.

To me, the laymen and laywomen are like the water jar that's uncracked
but porous. I teach them the Dhamma that's good in the beginning, good
in the middle, and good in the end, meaningful and well-phrased. And I
reveal a spiritual practice that's entirely full and pure. Why is that?
Because they live with me as their island, protection, shelter, and
refuge.

To me, the ascetics, brahmins, and wanderers of other religions are like
the water jar that's cracked and porous. I also teach them the Dhamma
that's good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
meaningful and well-phrased. And I reveal a spiritual practice that's
entirely full and pure. Why is that? Hopefully they might understand
even a single sentence, which would be for their lasting welfare and
happiness."

When he said this, Asibandhaka's son the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.8 A Horn Blower *Saṅkhadhamasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove.

Then Asibandhaka's son the chief, who was a disciple of the Jains, went
up to the Buddha, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him,
"Chief, how does the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan teach
his disciples?"

"Sir, this is how the Jain Ñātika teaches his disciples:
'Everyone who kills a living creature, steals, commits sexual
misconduct, or lies goes to a place of loss, to hell. You're led on by
what you usually live by.' This is how the Jain Ñātika
teaches his disciples."

"'You're led on by what you usually live by': if this were true, then,
according to what the Jain Ñātika says, no-one would go to
a place of loss, to hell.

What do you think, chief? Take a person who kills living creatures. If
we compare periods of time during the day and night, which is more
frequent: the occasions when they're killing or when they're not
killing?"

"The occasions when they're killing are less frequent, while the
occasions when they're not killing are more frequent."

"'You're led on by what you usually live by': if this were true, then,
according to what the Jain ascetic of the Ñātika clan says,
no-one would go to a place of loss, to hell.

What do you think, chief? Take a person who steals ...

Take a person who commits sexual misconduct ...

Take a person who lies. If we compare periods of time during the day and
night, which is more frequent: the occasions when they're lying or when
they're not lying?"

"The occasions when they're lying are less frequent, while the occasions
when they're not lying are more frequent."

"'You're led on by what you usually live by': if this were true, then,
according to what the Jain Ñātika says, no-one would go to
a place of loss, to hell.

Take some teacher who has this doctrine and view: 'Everyone who kills a
living creature, steals, commits sexual misconduct, or lies goes to a
place of loss, to hell.' And there's a disciple who is devoted to that
teacher. They think: 'My teacher has this doctrine and view: "Everyone
who kills a living creature, steals, commits sexual misconduct, or lies
goes to a place of loss, to hell." But I've killed living creatures ...
stolen ... committed sexual misconduct ... or lied.' They get the view:
'I too am going to a place of loss, to hell.' Unless they give up that
speech and that thought, and let go of that view, they will be cast down
to hell.

But consider when a Realized One arises in the world, perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed. In many ways he criticizes and denounces
killing living creatures, saying: 'Stop killing living creatures!' He
criticizes and denounces stealing ... sexual misconduct ... lying,
saying: 'Stop lying!' And there's a disciple who is devoted to that
teacher. Then they reflect: 'In many ways the Buddha criticizes and
denounces killing living creatures, saying: "Stop killing living
creatures!" But I have killed living creatures to a certain extent.
That's not right, it's not good, and I feel remorseful because of it.
But I can't undo what I have done.' Reflecting like this, they give up
killing living creatures, and in future they don't kill living
creatures. That's how to give up this bad deed and get past it.

'In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces stealing ...'

'In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces sexual misconduct ...'

'In many ways the Buddha criticizes and denounces lying, saying: "Stop
lying!" But I have lied to a certain extent. That's not right, it's not
good, and I feel remorseful because of it. But I can't undo what I have
done.' Reflecting like this, they give up lying, and in future they
refrain from lying. That's how to give up this bad deed and get past it.

They give up killing living creatures. They give up stealing. They give
up sexual misconduct. They give up lying. They give up divisive speech.
They give up harsh speech. They give up talking nonsense. They give up
covetousness. They give up ill will and malevolence. They give up wrong
view and have right view.

That noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will. Suppose there was a powerful horn blower.
They'd easily make themselves heard in the four quarters. In the same
way, when the heart's release by love has been developed and cultivated
like this, any limited deeds they've done don't remain or persist there.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion
... They meditate spreading a heart full of rejoicing ... They meditate
spreading a heart full of equanimity to one direction, and to the
second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above,
below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of
equanimity to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of
enmity and ill will. Suppose there was a powerful horn blower. They'd
easily make themselves heard in the four quarters. In the same way, when
the heart's release by equanimity has been developed and cultivated like
this, any limited deeds they've done don't remain or persist there."

When he said this, Asibandhaka's son the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.9 Families *Kulasutta*

At one time the Buddha was wandering in the land of the Kosalans
together with a large Saṅgha of mendicants when he arrived
at Nāḷandā. There he stayed near Nāḷandā in
Pāvārika's mango grove.

Now that was a time of famine and scarcity in Nāḷandā, with
blighted crops turned to straw. At that time the Jain ascetic of the
Ñātika clan was residing at Nāḷandā together
with a large assembly of Jain ascetics. Then Asibandhaka's son the
chief, who was a disciple of the Jains, went up to the Jain
Ñātika, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Jain
Ñātika said to him:

"Come, chief, refute the ascetic Gotama's doctrine. Then you will get a
good reputation: 'Asibandhaka's son the chief refuted the doctrine of
the ascetic Gotama, so mighty and powerful!'"

"But sir, how am I to do this?"

"Here, brahmin, go to the ascetic Gotama and say to him: 'Sir, don't you
in many ways praise kindness, protection, and sympathy for families?'
When he's asked this, if he answers: 'Indeed I do, chief,' say this to
him: 'So what exactly are you doing, wandering together with this large
Saṅgha of mendicants during a time of famine and scarcity,
with blighted crops turned to straw? The Buddha is practicing to
annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!' When you put this dilemma to
him, the Buddha won't be able to either spit it out or swallow it down."

"Yes, sir," replied Asibandhaka's son. He got up from his seat, bowed,
and respectfully circled the Jain Ñātika, keeping him on
his right. Then he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, don't you in many ways praise kindness, protection, and sympathy
for families?"

"Indeed I do, chief."

"So what exactly are you doing, wandering together with this large
Saṅgha of mendicants during a time of famine and scarcity,
with blighted crops turned to straw? The Buddha is practicing to
annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!"

"Well, chief, I recollect ninety-one eons back but I'm not aware of any
family that's been ruined merely by offering some cooked almsfood.
Rather, rich, affluent, and wealthy families---with lots of gold and
silver, lots of property and assets, and lots of money and grain---all
acquired their wealth because of generosity, truth, and restraint.

Chief, there are eight causes and reasons for the ruin of families.
Their ruin stems from rulers, bandits, fire, or flood. Or their savings
vanish. Or their business fails due to not applying themselves to work.
Or a wastrel is born into the family who squanders and fritters away
their wealth. And impermanence is the eighth. These are the eight causes
and reasons for the ruin of families.

Given that these eight reasons are found, suppose someone says this:
'The Buddha is practicing to annihilate, collapse, and ruin families!'
Unless they give up that speech and that thought, and let go of that
view, they will be cast down to hell."

When he said this, Asibandhaka's son the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.10 With Maṇicūḷaka *Maṇicūḷakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the
Bamboo Grove, the squirrels' feeding ground. Now at that time while the
king's retinue was sitting together in the royal compound this
discussion came up among them, "Gold and currency are proper for
ascetics who follow the Sakyan. They accept and receive gold and
currency."

Now at that time the chief Maṇicūḷaka was sitting in that
assembly. He said to that retinue, "Good masters, don't say that. Gold
and currency are not proper for ascetics who follow the Sakyan. They
neither accept nor receive gold and currency. They have set aside gems
and gold, and rejected gold and currency." He was able to persuade that
assembly.

Then Maṇicūḷaka went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to
one side, and told him what had happened. He then said, "Answering this
way, I trust that I repeat what the Buddha has said, and don't
misrepresent him with an untruth. I trust my explanation is in line with
the teaching, and that there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or
criticism."

"Indeed, in answering this way you repeat what I've said, and don't
misrepresent me with an untruth. Your explanation is in line with the
teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal or criticism.

Gold and currency are not proper for ascetics who follow the Sakyan.
They neither accept nor receive gold and currency. They have set aside
gems and gold, and rejected gold and currency.

If gold and currency were proper for them, then the five kinds of
sensual stimulation would also be proper. And if the five kinds of
sensual stimulation are proper for them, you should categorically regard
them as not having the qualities of an ascetic or a follower of the
Sakyan.

Rather, chief, I say this: Straw may be looked for by one needing straw;
wood may be looked for by one needing wood; a cart may be looked for by
one needing a cart; a workman may be looked for by one needing a
workman. But I say that there is no way they can accept or look for gold
and currency."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.11 With Bhadraka *Bhadrakasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Mallas, near the
Mallian town called Uruvelakappa. Then Bhadraka the village chief went
up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Please, sir, teach me the origin and cessation of suffering."

"Chief, if I were to teach you about the origin and ending of suffering
in the past, saying 'this is how it was in the past,' you might have
doubts or uncertainties about that. If I were to teach you about the
origin and ending of suffering in the future, saying 'this is how it
will be in the future,' you might have doubts or uncertainties about
that. Rather, chief, I will teach you about the origin and ending of
suffering as I am sitting right here and you are sitting right there.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak."

"Yes, sir," Bhadraka replied. The Buddha said this:

"What do you think, chief? Are there any people here in Uruvelakappa
who, if they were executed, imprisoned, fined, or condemned, it would
cause you sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress?"

"There are, sir."

"But are there any people here in Uruvelakappa who, if they were
executed, imprisoned, fined, or condemned, it would not cause you
sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress?"

"There are, sir."

"What's the cause, chief, what's the reason why, if this was to happen
to some people it could cause you sorrow, while if it happens to others
it does not?"

"The people regarding whom this would give rise to sorrow are those I
desire and love. The people regarding whom this would not give rise to
sorrow are those I don't desire and love."

"With this present phenomenon that is seen, known, immediate, attained,
and fathomed, you may infer to the past and future: 'All the suffering
that arose in the past was rooted and sourced in desire. For desire is
the root of suffering. All the suffering that will arise in the future
will be rooted and sourced in desire. For desire is the root of
suffering.'"

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! How well said this was by the
Buddha! 'All the suffering that arises is rooted and sourced in desire.
For desire is the root of suffering.'

I have a boy called Ciravāsi, who resides in a house away
from here. I rise early and send someone, saying: 'Go, my man, and check
on my boy Ciravāsi.' Until they get back I worry: 'I hope
nothing's wrong with Ciravāsi!'"

"What do you think, chief? If Ciravāsi was executed,
imprisoned, fined, or condemned, would it cause you sorrow, lamentation,
pain, sadness, and distress?"

"How could it not, sir?"

"This too is a way to understand: 'All the suffering that arises is
rooted and sourced in desire. For desire is the root of suffering.'

What do you think, chief? Before you'd seen or heard of
Ciravāsi's mother, did you have any desire or love or
fondness for her?"

"No, sir."

"Then was it because you saw or heard of her that you had desire or love
or fondness for her?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you think, chief? If Ciravāsi's mother was
executed, imprisoned, fined, or condemned, would it cause you sorrow,
lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress?"

"How could it not, sir?"

"This too is a way to understand: 'All the suffering that arises is
rooted and sourced in desire. For desire is the root of suffering.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.12 With Rāsiya *Rāsiyasutta*

Then Rāsiya the chief went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat
down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'The ascetic Gotama criticizes all forms of
mortification. He categorically condemns and denounces those fervent
mortifiers who live rough.' Do those who say this repeat what the Buddha
has said, and not misrepresent him with an untruth? Is their explanation
in line with the teaching? Are there any legitimate grounds for rebuttal
and criticism?"

"Chief, those who say this do not repeat what I have said. They
misrepresent me with what is false, hollow, and untrue.

These two extremes should not be cultivated by one who has gone forth.
Indulgence in sensual pleasures, which is low, crude, ordinary, ignoble,
and pointless. And indulgence in self-mortification, which is painful,
ignoble, and pointless.

Avoiding these two extremes, the Realized One understood the middle way
of practice, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace,
direct knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment.

And what is that middle way of practice? It is simply this noble
eightfold path, that is: right view, right thought, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
immersion.

This, chief, is the middle way of practice that was understood by the
Realized One, which gives vision and knowledge, and leads to peace,
direct knowledge, awakening, and extinguishment.

There are these three kinds of pleasure seekers in the world. What
three? Take a pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, or
share it and make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using
illegitimate, coercive means. They make themselves happy and pleased,
but don't share it and make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth
using illegitimate, coercive means. They make themselves happy and
pleased, and they share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both legitimate and
illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They don't make themselves
happy and pleased, or share it and make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker
seeks wealth using means both legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive
and non-coercive. They don't make themselves happy and pleased, or share
it and make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive. They make
themselves happy and pleased, and they share it and make merit.

Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. They don't make themselves happy and pleased, or share it and
make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means. They make themselves happy and pleased, but don't
share it and make merit. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using
legitimate, non-coercive means. They make themselves happy and pleased,
and they share it and make merit. They enjoy that wealth tied,
infatuated, attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the
escape. Next, a pleasure seeker seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means. They make themselves happy and pleased, and they
share it and make merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied,
uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the
escape.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, or
share it and make merit. They may be criticized on three grounds. What
three? They seek wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is the
first ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for criticism. They don't share it
and make merit. This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be criticized on these three grounds.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't
share it and make merit. This pleasure seeker may be criticized on two
grounds, and praised on one. What are the two grounds for criticism?
They seek wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is the first
ground for criticism. They don't share it and make merit. This is the
second ground for criticism. What is the one ground for praise? They
make themselves happy and pleased. This is the one ground for praise.
This pleasure seeker may be criticized on these two grounds, and praised
on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares
it and makes merit. This pleasure seeker may be criticized on one
ground, and praised on two. What is the one ground for criticism? They
seek wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is the one ground
for criticism. What are the two grounds for praise? They make themselves
happy and pleased. This is the first ground for praise. They share it
and make merit. This is the second ground for praise. This pleasure
seeker may be criticized on this one ground, and praised on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
doesn't make themselves happy and pleased, or share it and make merit.
They may be praised on one ground, and criticized on three. What is the
one ground for praise? They seek wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the one ground for praise. What are the three grounds for
criticism? They seek wealth using illegitimate, coercive means. This is
the first ground for criticism. They don't make themselves happy and
pleased. This is the second ground for criticism. They don't share it
and make merit. This is the third ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on these three.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and makes
themselves happy and pleased, but doesn't share it and make merit. They
may be praised on two grounds, and criticized on two. What are the two
grounds for praise? They seek wealth using legitimate, non-coercive
means. This is the first ground for praise. They make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. What are the two
grounds for criticism? They seek wealth using illegitimate, coercive
means. This is the first ground for criticism. They don't share it and
make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using means both
legitimate and illegitimate, and coercive and non-coercive, and who
makes themselves happy and pleased, and shares it and makes merit. They
may be praised on three grounds, and criticized on one. What are the
three grounds for praise? They seek wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means. This is the first ground for praise. They make
themselves happy and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They
share it and make merit. This is the third ground for praise. What is
the one ground for criticism? They seek wealth using illegitimate,
coercive means. This is the one ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on these three grounds, and criticized on this
one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, but who doesn't make themselves happy and pleased,
or share it and make merit. They may be praised on one ground, and
criticized on two. What is the one ground for praise? They seek wealth
using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the one ground for praise.
What are the two grounds for criticism? They don't make themselves happy
and pleased. This is the first ground for criticism. They don't share it
and make merit. This is the second ground for criticism. This pleasure
seeker may be praised on this one ground, and criticized on these two.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, but
doesn't share it and make merit. This pleasure seeker may be praised on
two grounds, and criticized on one. What are the two grounds for praise?
They seek wealth using legitimate, non-coercive means. This is the first
ground for praise. They make themselves happy and pleased. This is the
second ground for praise. What is the one ground for criticism? They
don't share it and make merit. This is the one ground for criticism.
This pleasure seeker may be praised on these two grounds, and criticized
on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. But they enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated,
attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. They
may be praised on three grounds and criticized on one. What are the
three grounds for praise? They seek wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means. This is the first ground for praise. They make
themselves happy and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They
share it and make merit. This is the third ground for praise. What is
the one ground for criticism? They enjoy that wealth tied, infatuated,
attached, blind to the drawbacks, and not understanding the escape. This
is the one ground for criticism. This pleasure seeker may be praised on
these three grounds, and criticized on this one.

Now, consider the pleasure seeker who seeks wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means, and who makes themselves happy and pleased, and
shares it and makes merit. And they enjoy that wealth untied,
uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and understanding the
escape. This pleasure seeker may be praised on four grounds. What are
the four grounds for praise? They seek wealth using legitimate,
non-coercive means. This is the first ground for praise. They make
themselves happy and pleased. This is the second ground for praise. They
share it and make merit. This is the third ground for praise. They enjoy
that wealth untied, uninfatuated, unattached, seeing the drawbacks, and
understanding the escape. This is the fourth ground for praise. This
pleasure seeker may be praised on these four grounds.

These three fervent mortifiers who live rough are found in the world.
What three?

Take a fervent mortifier who has gone forth out of faith from the lay
life to homelessness, thinking: 'Hopefully I will achieve a skillful
quality! Hopefully I will realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge
and vision worthy of the noble ones!' They mortify and torment
themselves. But they don't achieve any skillful quality, or realize any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

Take another fervent mortifier who has gone forth out of faith from the
lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'Hopefully I will achieve a skillful
quality! Hopefully I will realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge
and vision worthy of the noble ones!' They mortify and torment
themselves. And they achieve a skillful quality, but don't realize any
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

Take another fervent mortifier who has gone forth out of faith from the
lay life to homelessness, thinking: 'Hopefully I will achieve a skillful
quality! Hopefully I will realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge
and vision worthy of the noble ones!' They mortify and torment
themselves. And they achieve a skillful quality, and they realize a
superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.

In this case, the first fervent mortifier may be criticized on three
grounds. What three? They mortify and torment themselves. This is the
first ground for criticism. They don't achieve a skillful quality. This
is the second ground for criticism. They don't realize a superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. This is
the third ground for criticism. This fervent mortifier may be criticized
on these three grounds.

In this case, the second fervent mortifier may be criticized on two
grounds, and praised on one. What are the two grounds for criticism?
They mortify and torment themselves. This is the first ground for
criticism. They don't realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones. This is the second ground for
criticism. What is the one ground for praise? They achieve a skillful
quality. This is the one ground for praise. This fervent mortifier may
be criticized on these two grounds, and praised on one.

In this case, the third fervent mortifier may be criticized on one
ground, and praised on two. What is the one ground for criticism? They
mortify and torment themselves. This is the one ground for criticism.
What are the two grounds for praise? They achieve a skillful quality.
This is the first ground for praise. They realize a superhuman
distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. This is
the second ground for praise. This fervent mortifier may be criticized
on this one ground, and praised on two.

There are these three kinds of wearing away that are apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know them for themselves. What three?

A greedy person, because of greed, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. When they've given up greed they don't have such
intentions. This wearing away is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A hateful person, because of hate, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. When they've given up hate they don't have such
intentions. This wearing away is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

A deluded person, because of delusion, intends to hurt themselves, hurt
others, and hurt both. When they've given up delusion they don't have
such intentions. This wearing away is apparent in the present life,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so that sensible
people can know it for themselves.

These are the three kinds of wearing away that are apparent in the
present life, immediately effective, inviting inspection, relevant, so
that sensible people can know them for themselves."

When he said this, Rāsiya the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."

<!--pg-->
### SN 42.13 With Pāṭaliya *Pāṭaliyasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Koliyans, where
they have a town called Uttara. Then Pāṭaliya the chief
went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and said to him:

"Sir, I have heard this: 'The ascetic Gotama knows magic.' Do those who
say this repeat what the Buddha has said, and not misrepresent him with
an untruth? Is their explanation in line with the teaching? Are there
any legitimate grounds for rebuttal and criticism? For we don't want to
misrepresent the Blessed One."

"Chief, those who say this repeat what I have said, and don't
misrepresent me with an untruth. Their explanation is in line with the
teaching, and there are no legitimate grounds for rebuttal and
criticism."

"Sir, we didn't believe that what those ascetics and brahmins said was
really true. But it seems the ascetic Gotama is a magician!"

"Chief, does someone who says 'I know magic' also say 'I am a
magician'?"

"That's right, Blessed One! That's right, Holy One!"

"Well then, chief, I'll ask you about this in return, and you can answer
as you like.

What do you think, chief? Do you know the Koliyan officers with drooping
headdresses?"

"I know them, sir."

"And what's their job?"

"To put a stop to bandits and to deliver messages for the Koliyans."

"What do you think, chief? Are the Koliyan officers with drooping
headdresses moral or immoral?"

"I know that they're immoral, of bad character, sir. They are among
those in the world who are immoral and of bad character."

"Would it be right to say that Pāṭaliya knows the Kolyian
officers with drooping headdresses who are immoral, of bad character, so
he too must be immoral and of bad character?"

"No, sir. I'm quite different from the Koliyan officers with drooping
headdresses, we have quite different characters."

"So if you can know those officers of bad character while you are not of
bad character, why can't the Realized One know magic, without being a
magician?

I understand magic and its result. And I understand how magicians
practice so that when their body breaks up, after death, they're reborn
in a place of loss, a bad place, the underworld, hell.

I understand killing living creatures and its result. And I understand
how those who kill living creatures practice so that when their body
breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad place,
the underworld, hell. I understand stealing ... sexual misconduct ...
lying ... divisive speech ... harsh speech ... talking nonsense ...
covetousness ... ill will ... wrong view and its result. And I
understand how those who have wrong view practice so that when their
body breaks up, after death, they're reborn in a place of loss, a bad
place, the underworld, hell.

There are some ascetics and brahmins who have this doctrine and view:
'Everyone who kills living creatures experiences pain and sadness in
this very life. Everyone who steals ... commits sexual misconduct ...
lies experiences pain and sadness in this very life.'

But you can see someone, garlanded and adorned, nicely bathed and
anointed, hair and beard dressed, taking his pleasure with women as if
he were a king. You might ask someone: 'Worthy man, what did that man
do?' And they'd reply: 'Worthy man, that man attacked the king's enemy
and killed them. The king was delighted and gave him this reward. That's
why he's garlanded and adorned, nicely bathed and anointed, hair and
beard dressed, taking his pleasure with women as if he were a king.'

And you can see someone else, his arms tied tightly behind his back with
a strong rope. His head is shaven and he's marched from street to street
and from square to square to the beating of a harsh drum. Then he's
taken out the south gate and there, to the south of the city, they chop
off his head. You might ask someone: 'Worthy man, what did that man do?'
And they'd reply: 'Worthy man, that man is an enemy of the king, and he
has murdered a man or a woman. That's why the rulers arrested him and
inflicted such punishment.'

What do you think, chief? Have you seen or heard of such a thing?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"Since this is so, the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that everyone
who kills living creatures experiences pain and sadness in this very
life: are they right or wrong?"

"They're wrong, sir."

"But those who speak hollow, false nonsense: are they moral or immoral?"

"Immoral, sir."

"And are those who are immoral, of bad character practicing wrongly or
rightly?"

"They're practicing wrongly, sir."

"And do those who are practicing wrongly have wrong view or right view?"

"They have wrong view, sir."

"But is it appropriate to have confidence in those of wrong view?"

"No, sir."

"You can see someone, garlanded and adorned ... 'Worthy man, that man
attacked the king's enemy and took their valuables. The king was
delighted and gave him this reward. ...' ...

And you can see someone else, his arms tied tightly behind his back ...
'Worthy man, that man took something from a village or wilderness, with
the intention to commit theft. That's why the rulers arrested him and
inflicted such punishment.' What do you think, chief? Have you seen or
heard of such a thing?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"Since this is so, the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that everyone
who steals experiences pain and sadness in this very life: are they
right or wrong? ... Is it appropriate to have confidence in them?"

"No, sir."

"You can see someone, garlanded and adorned ... 'Worthy man, that man
had sexual relations with the wives of an enemy king. The king was
delighted and gave him this reward. ...' ...

And you can see someone else, his arms tied tightly behind his back ...
'Worthy man, that man had sexual relations with the women and maidens of
good families. That's why the rulers arrested him and inflicted such
punishment.' What do you think, chief? Have you seen or heard of such a
thing?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"Since this is so, the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that everyone
who commits sexual misconduct experiences pain and sadness in this very
life: are they right or wrong? ... Is it appropriate to have confidence
in them?"

"No, sir."

"And you can see someone, garlanded and adorned ... 'Worthy man, that
man amused the king with lies. The king was delighted and gave him this
reward. ...' ...

And you can see someone else, his arms tied tightly behind his back ...
'Worthy man, that man has ruined a householder or householder's child by
lying. That's why the rulers arrested him and inflicted such
punishment.' What do you think, chief? Have you seen or heard of such a
thing?"

"Sir, we have seen it and heard of it, and we will hear of it again."

"Since this is so, the ascetics and brahmins whose view is that everyone
who lies experiences pain and sadness in this very life: are they right
or wrong?"

"They're wrong, sir."

"But those who speak hollow, false nonsense: are they moral or immoral?"

"Immoral, sir."

"And are those who are immoral, of bad character practicing wrongly or
rightly?"

"They're practicing wrongly, sir."

"And do those who are practicing wrongly have wrong view or right view?"

"They have wrong view, sir."

"But is it appropriate to have confidence in those of wrong view?"

"No, sir.

It's incredible, sir, it's amazing! I have a guest house, where there
are cots, seats, water jars, and oil lamps. Whenever an ascetic or
brahmin comes to stay, I share what I have as best I can. Once it so
happened, sir, that four teachers of different views, beliefs, and
opinions came to stay at my guest house.

One teacher had this doctrine and view: 'There's no meaning in giving,
sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit or result of good and bad
deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such thing as mother and father,
or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there's no ascetic or
brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describes the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.'

One teacher had this doctrine and view: 'There is meaning in giving,
sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and results of good and bad
deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such things as mother and
father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously. And there are ascetics
and brahmins who are rightly comported and rightly practiced, and who
describe the afterlife after realizing it with their own insight.'

One teacher had this doctrine and view: 'The one who acts does nothing
wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress,
intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the same. Nothing bad is
done when they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal
from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and
lie. If you were to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one
heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram, no evil comes of
that, and no outcome of evil. If you were to go along the south bank of
the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to
do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were
to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and
encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of that, and no
outcome of merit. In giving, self-control, restraint, and truthfulness
there is no merit or outcome of merit.'

One teacher had this doctrine and view: 'The one who acts does a bad
deed when they punish, mutilate, torture, aggrieve, oppress, intimidate,
or when they encourage others to do the same. A bad deed is done when
they kill, steal, break into houses, plunder wealth, steal from isolated
buildings, commit highway robbery, commit adultery, and lie. If you were
to reduce all the living creatures of this earth to one heap and mass of
flesh with a razor-edged chakram, evil comes of that, and an outcome of
evil. If you were to go along the south bank of the Ganges killing,
mutilating, and torturing, and encouraging others to do the same, evil
comes of that, and an outcome of evil. If you were to go along the north
bank of the Ganges giving and sacrificing and encouraging others to do
the same, merit comes of that, and an outcome of merit. In giving,
self-control, restraint, and truthfulness there is merit and outcome of
merit.'

I had doubt and uncertainty about that: 'I wonder who of these respected
ascetics and brahmins speaks the truth, and who speaks falsehood?'"

"Chief, no wonder you're doubting and uncertain. Doubt has come up in
you about an uncertain matter."

"I am quite confident that the Buddha is capable of teaching me so that
I can give up this state of uncertainty."

"Chief, there is immersion based on understanding of principle. If you
gain such mental immersion, you can give up that state of uncertainty.

And what is immersion based on understanding of principle? It's when a
noble disciple has given up killing living creatures, stealing, sexual
misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, talking nonsense,
covetousness, ill will, and wrong view.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They reflect thus: 'That teacher who had this doctrine and view:
"There's no meaning in giving, sacrifice, or offerings. There's no fruit
or result of good and bad deeds. There's no afterlife. There's no such
thing as mother and father, or beings that are reborn spontaneously. And
there's no ascetic or brahmin who is rightly comported and rightly
practiced, and who describes the afterlife after realizing it with their
own insight." If what this good teacher says is true, it's a safe bet
for me to not hurt any creature firm or frail. I hold a perfect hand on
both counts, since I'm restrained in body, speech, and mind, and when my
body breaks up, after death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly
realm.'

Joy springs up in them. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind
is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is that immersion based on understanding
of principle. If you gain such mental immersion, you can give up that
state of uncertainty.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They reflect thus: 'That teacher who had this doctrine and view: "There
is meaning in giving, sacrifice, and offerings. There are fruits and
results of good and bad deeds. There is an afterlife. There are such
things as mother and father, and beings that are reborn spontaneously.
And there are ascetics and brahmins who are rightly comported and
rightly practiced, and who describe the afterlife after realizing it
with their own insight." If what this good teacher says is true, it's a
safe bet for me to not hurt any creature firm or frail. I hold a perfect
hand on both counts, since I'm restrained in body, speech, and mind, and
when my body breaks up, after death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.'

Joy springs up in them. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind
is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is that immersion based on understanding
of principle. If you gain such mental immersion, you can give up that
state of uncertainty.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They reflect thus: 'That teacher who had this doctrine and view: "The
one who acts does nothing wrong when they punish, mutilate, torture,
aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the
same. Nothing bad is done when they kill, steal, break into houses,
plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery,
commit adultery, and lie. If you were to reduce all the living creatures
of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram,
no evil comes of that, and no outcome of evil. If you were to go along
the south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and
encouraging others to do the same, no evil comes of that, and no outcome
of evil. If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and
sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, no merit comes of
that, and no outcome of merit. In giving, self-control, restraint, and
truthfulness there is no merit or outcome of merit." If what this good
teacher says is true, it's a safe bet for me to not hurt any creature
firm or frail. I hold a perfect hand on both counts, since I'm
restrained in body, speech, and mind, and when my body breaks up, after
death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.'

Joy springs up in them. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind
is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is that immersion based on understanding
of principle. If you gain such mental immersion, you can give up that
state of uncertainty.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of love to one
direction, and to the second, and to the third, and to the fourth. In
the same way above, below, across, everywhere, all around, they spread a
heart full of love to the whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless,
free of enmity and ill will.

They reflect thus: 'That teacher who had this doctrine and view: "The
one who acts does a bad deed when they punish, mutilate, torture,
aggrieve, oppress, intimidate, or when they encourage others to do the
same. A bad deed is done when they kill, steal, break into houses,
plunder wealth, steal from isolated buildings, commit highway robbery,
commit adultery, and lie. If you were to reduce all the living creatures
of this earth to one heap and mass of flesh with a razor-edged chakram,
evil comes of that, and an outcome of evil. If you were to go along the
south bank of the Ganges killing, mutilating, and torturing, and
encouraging others to do the same, evil comes of that, and an outcome of
evil. If you were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giving and
sacrificing and encouraging others to do the same, merit comes of that,
and an outcome of merit. In giving, self-control, restraint, and
truthfulness there is merit and outcome of merit." If what this good
teacher says is true, it's a safe bet for me to not hurt any creature
firm or frail. I hold a perfect hand on both counts, since I'm
restrained in body, speech, and mind, and when my body breaks up, after
death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm.'

Joy springs up in them. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind
is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is that immersion based on understanding
of principle. If you gain such mental immersion, you can give up that
state of uncertainty.

Then that noble disciple is rid of desire, rid of ill will, unconfused,
aware, and mindful. They meditate spreading a heart full of compassion
... rejoicing ... equanimity to one direction, and to the second, and to
the third, and to the fourth. In the same way above, below, across,
everywhere, all around, they spread a heart full of equanimity to the
whole world---abundant, expansive, limitless, free of enmity and ill
will.

They reflect thus: 'If what this good teacher says is true, it's a safe
bet for me to not hurt any creature firm or frail. I hold a perfect hand
on both counts, since I'm restrained in body, speech, and mind, and when
my body breaks up, after death, I'll be reborn in a good place, a
heavenly realm.'

Joy springs up in them. Being joyful, rapture springs up. When the mind
is full of rapture, the body becomes tranquil. When the body is
tranquil, they feel bliss. And when blissful, the mind becomes immersed
in samādhi. This is that immersion based on understanding
of principle. If you gain such mental immersion, you can give up that
state of uncertainty."

When he said this, Pāṭaliya the chief said to the Buddha,
"Excellent, sir! Excellent! ... From this day forth, may the Buddha
remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge for life."



