# Linked Discourses on the Unconditioned

<!--pg-->
## Chapter One

### N 43.1 Mindfulness of the Body *Kāyagatāsatisutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads
to the unconditioned. Listen ...

And what is the unconditioned? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion.
This is called the unconditioned. And what is the path that leads to the
unconditioned? Mindfulness of the body. This is called the path that
leads to the unconditioned.

So, mendicants, I've taught you the unconditioned and the path that
leads to the unconditioned. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher
should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are these
roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption,
mendicants! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my
instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.2 Serenity and Discernment *Samathavipassanāsutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads
to the unconditioned. Listen ...

And what is the unconditioned? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion.
This is called the unconditioned. And what is the path that leads to the
unconditioned? Serenity and discernment. This is called the path that
leads to the unconditioned. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.3 Placing the Mind and Keeping it Connected *Savitakkasavicārasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? Immersion with
placing the mind and keeping it connected. Immersion without placing the
mind, merely keeping it connected. Immersion without placing the mind or
keeping it connected. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.4 Emptiness Immersion *Suññatasamādhisutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? Emptiness
immersion; signless immersion; undirected immersion. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.5 Mindfulness Meditation *Satipaṭṭhānasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The four kinds of
mindfulness meditation. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.6 Right Efforts *Sammappadhānasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The four right
efforts. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.7 Bases of Psychic Power *Iddhipādasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The four bases of
psychic power. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.8 Faculties *Indriyasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The five
faculties. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.9 Powers *Balasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The five powers.
..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.10 Awakening Factors *Bojjhaṅgasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The seven
awakening factors. ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.11 The Path *Maggaṅgasutta*

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? The noble
eightfold path. This is called the path that leads to the unconditioned.

So, mendicants, I've taught you the unconditioned and the path that
leads to the unconditioned. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher
should do who wants what's best for their disciples. Here are these
roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption,
mendicants! Don't be negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my
instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
## Chapter Two

### N 43.12 The Unconditioned *Asaṅkhatasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads
to the unconditioned. Listen ...

And what is the unconditioned? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion.
This is called the unconditioned.

And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? Serenity. This is
called the path that leads to the unconditioned.

So, mendicants, I've taught you the unconditioned and the path that
leads to the unconditioned.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be negligent!
Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

"Mendicants, I will teach you the unconditioned and the path that leads
to the unconditioned. Listen ...

And what is the unconditioned? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion.
This is called the unconditioned.

And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned? Discernment. This
is called the path that leads to the unconditioned. ..."

"And what is the path that leads to the unconditioned?

Immersion with placing the mind and keeping it connected. ... Immersion
without placing the mind, merely keeping it connected. ... Immersion
without placing the mind or keeping it connected. ...

Emptiness immersion. ... Signless immersion. ... Undirected immersion.
...

A mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body---keen, aware,
and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world. ... A
mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of feelings ... A mendicant
meditates by observing an aspect of the mind ... A mendicant meditates
by observing an aspect of principles ...

A mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the
mind, and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities don't arise. ... A
mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind,
and strives so that bad, unskillful qualities are given up. ... A
mendicant generates enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind,
and strives so that skillful qualities arise. ... A mendicant generates
enthusiasm, tries, makes an effort, exerts the mind, and strives so that
skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost, but increase,
mature, and are fulfilled by development. ...

A mendicant develops the basis of psychic power that has immersion due
to enthusiasm, and active effort. ... A mendicant develops the basis of
psychic power that has immersion due to energy ... immersion due to
mental development ... immersion due to inquiry, and active effort. ...

A mendicant develops the faculty of faith, which relies on seclusion,
fading away, and cessation, and ripens as letting go. ... A mendicant
develops the faculty of energy ... mindfulness ... immersion ... wisdom,
which relies on seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripens as
letting go. ...

A mendicant develops the power of faith ... energy ... mindfulness ...
immersion ... wisdom, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripens as letting go. ...

A mendicant develops the awakening factor of mindfulness ...
investigation of principles ... energy ... rapture ... tranquility ...
immersion ... equanimity, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripens as letting go. ...

A mendicant develops right view ... right thought ... right speech ...
right action ... right livelihood ... right effort ... right mindfulness
... right immersion, which relies on seclusion, fading away, and
cessation, and ripens as letting go.

This is called the path that leads to the unconditioned.

So, mendicants, I've taught you the unconditioned and the path that
leads to the unconditioned.

Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants what's
best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here are
these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be negligent!
Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.13 Uninclined *Anatasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the uninclined ..."

**(Tell in full as in the unconditioned in the previous chapter.)**

<!--pg-->
### N 43.14--43 Undefiled, Etc. *Anāsavādisutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the undefiled ...

the truth ...

the far shore ...

the subtle ...

the very hard to see ...

the freedom from old age ...

the constant ...

the not falling apart ...

that in which nothing appears ...

the unproliferated ...

the peaceful ...

the freedom from death ...

the sublime ...

the state of grace ...

the sanctuary ...

the ending of craving ...

the incredible ...

the amazing ...

the untroubled ...

the not liable to trouble ...

extinguishment ...

the unafflicted ...

dispassion ...

purity ...

freedom ...

not clinging ...

the island ...

the protection ...

the shelter ...

the refuge ..."

<!--pg-->
### N 43.44 The Haven *Parāyanasutta*

"Mendicants, I will teach you the haven and the path that leads to the
haven. Listen ...

And what is the haven? The ending of greed, hate, and delusion. This is
called the haven.

And what is the path that leads to the haven? Mindfulness of the body.
This is called the path that leads to the haven.

So, mendicants, I've taught you the haven and the path that leads to the
haven. Out of sympathy, I've done what a teacher should do who wants
what's best for their disciples. Here are these roots of trees, and here
are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don't be
negligent! Don't regret it later! This is my instruction to you."

**(Tell in full as in the unconditioned.)**


