# Linked Discourses on the Faculties

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Plain Version

### SN 48.1 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

There the Buddha said:

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.2 A Stream-Enterer (1st) *Paṭhamasotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' gratification, drawback,
and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a stream-enterer, not liable
to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.3 A Stream-Enterer (2nd) *Dutiyasotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.4 A Perfected One (1st) *Paṭhamaarahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A noble disciple
comes to be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five
faculties' gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a mendicant is
called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the
spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.5 A Perfected One (2nd) *Dutiyaarahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. A mendicant comes to
be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a mendicant is
called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who has completed the
spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of continued
existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.6 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the
gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the
gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.7 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
faculty of faith, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads
to its cessation. They don't understand the faculty of energy ...
mindfulness ... immersion ... wisdom, its origin, its cessation, and the
practice that leads to its cessation. I don't deem them as true ascetics
and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the goal of life as an
ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it with their own
insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of faith,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They do understand the faculty of energy ... mindfulness ... immersion
... wisdom, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live
having realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.8 Should Be Seen *Daṭṭhabbasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And where should the faculty of faith be seen? In the four factors of
stream-entry.

And where should the faculty of energy be seen? In the four right
efforts.

And where should the faculty of mindfulness be seen? In the four kinds
of mindfulness meditation.

And where should the faculty of immersion be seen? In the four
absorptions.

And where should the faculty of wisdom be seen? In the four noble
truths.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.9 Analysis (1st) *Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. This is called the
faculty of energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. This is called the faculty
of mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This
is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.10 Analysis (2nd) *Dutiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? It's when a noble disciple lives with
energy roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing
skillful qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off
when it comes to developing skillful qualities. They generate
enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad,
unskillful qualities don't arise. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that bad, unskillful qualities
that have arisen are given up. They generate enthusiasm, try, make an
effort, exert the mind, and strive so that skillful qualities arise.
They generate enthusiasm, try, make an effort, exert the mind, and
strive so that skillful qualities that have arisen remain, are not lost,
but increase, mature, and are completed by development. This is called
the faculty of energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? It's when a noble disciple is
mindful. They have utmost mindfulness and alertness, and can remember
and recall what was said and done long ago. They meditate observing an
aspect of the body---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and
displeasure for the world. They meditate observing an aspect of feelings
... mind ... principles---keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness
and displeasure for the world. This is called the faculty of
mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. Quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful qualities,
they enter and remain in the first absorption, which has the rapture and
bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping it
connected. As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are
stilled, they enter and remain in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. And with the
fading away of rapture, they enter and remain in the third absorption,
where they meditate with equanimity, mindful and aware, personally
experiencing the bliss of which the noble ones declare, 'Equanimous and
mindful, one meditates in bliss.' Giving up pleasure and pain, and
ending former happiness and sadness, they enter and remain in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. This is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. They truly
understand: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is called the faculty of
wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Weaker

### SN 48.11 Gain *Paṭilābhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

And what is the faculty of faith? It's when a noble disciple has faith
in the Realized One's awakening: 'That Blessed One is perfected, a fully
awakened Buddha, accomplished in knowledge and conduct, holy, knower of
the world, supreme guide for those who wish to train, teacher of gods
and humans, awakened, blessed.' This is called the faculty of faith.

And what is the faculty of energy? The energy that's gained in
connection with the four right efforts. This is called the faculty of
energy.

And what is the faculty of mindfulness? The mindfulness that's gained in
connection with the four kinds of mindfulness meditation. This is called
the faculty of mindfulness.

And what is the faculty of immersion? It's when a noble disciple,
relying on letting go, gains immersion, gains unification of mind. This
is called the faculty of immersion.

And what is the faculty of wisdom? It's when a noble disciple is wise.
They have the wisdom of arising and passing away which is noble,
penetrative, and leads to the complete ending of suffering. This is
called the faculty of wisdom.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.12 In Brief (1st) *Paṭhamasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner. If
they are weaker still, they're a once-returner. If they are weaker
still, they're a stream-enterer. If they're weaker still, they're a
follower of teachings. If they're weaker still, they're a follower by
faith."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.13 In Brief (2nd) *Dutiyasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner ...
a once-returner ... a stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a
follower by faith.

So from a diversity of faculties there's a diversity of fruits. And from
a diversity of fruits there's a diversity of persons."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.14 In Brief (3rd) *Tatiyasaṁkhittasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're a non-returner ...
a once-returner ... a stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a
follower by faith.

So, mendicants, if you practice partially you succeed partially. If you
practice fully you succeed fully. These five faculties are not a waste,
I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.15 In Detail (1st) *Paṭhamavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.16 In Detail (2nd) *Dutiyavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith.

So from a diversity of faculties there's a diversity of fruits. And from
a diversity of fruits there's a diversity of persons."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.17 In Detail (3rd) *Tatiyavitthārasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a
stream-enterer ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith.

So, mendicants, if you practice fully you succeed fully. If you practice
partially you succeed partially. These five faculties are not a waste, I
say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.18 Practicing *Paṭipannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're practicing to
realize the fruit of perfection ... a non-returner ... practicing to
realize the fruit of non-return ... a once-returner ... practicing to
realize the fruit of once-return ... a stream-enterer ... practicing to
realize the fruit of stream-entry. Someone who totally and utterly lacks
these five faculties is an outsider who belongs with the ordinary
persons, I say."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.19 Endowed *Sampannasutta*

Then a mendicant went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and
said to him:

"Sir, they speak of someone who is 'accomplished regarding the
faculties'. How is someone accomplished regarding the faculties
defined?"

"Mendicant, it's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom that lead to peace and
awakening. This is how someone who is accomplished regarding the
faculties is defined."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.20 The Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

It's because of developing and cultivating these five faculties that a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Six Faculties

### SN 48.21 Future Lives *Punabbhavasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. As long as I didn't
truly understand these five faculties' gratification, drawback, and
escape, I didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in this world
with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population with
its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these five faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.22 The Life Faculty *Jīvitindriyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three faculties. What three? The faculties
of femininity, masculinity, and life. These are the three faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.23 The Faculty of Enlightenment *Aññindriyasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these three faculties. What three? The faculty of
understanding that one's enlightenment is imminent. The faculty of
enlightenment. The faculty of one who is enlightened. These are the
three faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.24 A One-Seeder *Ekabījīsutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Someone who has completed and fulfilled these five faculties is a
perfected one. If they are weaker than that, they're one who is
extinguished between one life and the next ... one who is extinguished
upon landing ... one who is extinguished without extra effort ... one
who is extinguished with extra effort ... one who heads upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm ... a once-returner ... a one-seeder
... one who goes from family to family ... one who has seven rebirths at
most ... a follower of teachings ... a follower by faith."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.25 Plain Version *Suddhakasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. These are the six
faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.26 A Stream-Enterer *Sotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. A noble disciple comes to
truly understand these six faculties' origin, ending, gratification,
drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a stream-enterer,
not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.27 A Perfected One *Arahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. A mendicant comes to be
freed by not grasping after truly understanding these six faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.

Such a mendicant is called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who
has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down
the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.28 Awakened *Sambuddhasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

As long as I didn't truly understand these six faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I didn't announce my supreme perfect awakening in
this world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this
population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

But when I did truly understand these six faculties' gratification,
drawback, and escape, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
world with its gods, Māras, and Divinities, this population
with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.

Knowledge and vision arose in me: 'My freedom is unshakable; this is my
last rebirth; now there'll be no more future lives.'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.29 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these six faculties. What six? The faculties of
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these six
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.30 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
eye faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to
its cessation. They don't understand the ear faculty ... nose faculty
... tongue faculty ... body faculty ... mind faculty, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I don't deem
them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't realize the
goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having realized it
with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the eye faculty, its
origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
They understand the ear faculty ... nose faculty ... tongue faculty ...
body faculty ... mind faculty, its origin, its cessation, and the
practice that leads to its cessation. I deem them as true ascetics and
brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or
brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Pleasure Faculty

### SN 48.31 Plain Version *Suddhikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. These are the five
faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.32 A Stream-Enterer *Sotāpannasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. A noble disciple
comes to truly understand these five faculties' origin, ending,
gratification, drawback, and escape. Such a noble disciple is called a
stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, bound for
awakening."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.33 A Perfected One *Arahantasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity. A mendicant comes to
be freed by not grasping after truly understanding these five faculties'
origin, ending, gratification, drawback, and escape.

Such a mendicant is called a perfected one, with defilements ended, who
has completed the spiritual journey, done what had to be done, laid down
the burden, achieved their own true goal, utterly ended the fetter of
continued existence, and is rightly freed through enlightenment."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.34 Ascetics and Brahmins (1st) *Paṭhamasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

There are ascetics and brahmins who don't truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those
venerables don't realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and
don't live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do truly understand the origin,
ending, gratification, drawback, and escape when it comes to these five
faculties. I deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having
realized it with their own insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.35 Ascetics and Brahmins (2nd) *Dutiyasamaṇabrāhmaṇasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don't understand the
faculty of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that
leads to its cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who don't
understand the faculty of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity,
its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation.
I don't deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don't
realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don't live having
realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty of
pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its
cessation. There are ascetics and brahmins who do understand the faculty
of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity, its origin, its
cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation. I deem them as
true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as
an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own
insight."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.36 Analysis (1st) *Paṭhamavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.37 Analysis (2nd) *Dutiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

In this context, the faculties of pleasure and happiness should be seen
as pleasant feeling. The faculties of pain and sadness should be seen as
painful feeling. The faculty of equanimity should be seen as neutral
feeling.

These are the five faculties."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.38 Analysis (3rd) *Tatiyavibhaṅgasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

And what is the faculty of pleasure? Physical enjoyment, physical
pleasure, the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from physical
contact. This is called the faculty of pleasure.

And what is the faculty of pain? Physical pain, physical unpleasantness,
the painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from physical contact. This
is called the faculty of pain.

And what is the faculty of happiness? Mental enjoyment, mental pleasure,
the enjoyable, pleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of happiness.

And what is the faculty of sadness? Mental pain, mental displeasure, the
painful, unpleasant feeling that's born from mind contact. This is
called the faculty of sadness.

And what is the faculty of equanimity? Neither pleasant nor unpleasant
feeling, whether physical or mental. This is the faculty of equanimity.

In this context, the faculties of pleasure and happiness should be seen
as pleasant feeling. The faculties of pain and sadness should be seen as
painful feeling. The faculty of equanimity should be seen as neutral
feeling.

That's how these five faculties, depending on how they're explained,
having been five become three, and having been three become five."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.39 The Simile of the Fire Sticks *Kaṭṭhopamasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pleasure, pain, happiness, sadness, and equanimity.

The faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you understand: 'I'm in a
state of pleasure.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced
as pleasant, you understand that the corresponding faculty of pleasure
ceases and stops.

The faculty of pain arises dependent on a contact to be experienced as
painful. When in a state of pain, you understand: 'I'm in a state of
pain.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as painful,
you understand that the corresponding faculty of pain ceases and stops.

The faculty of happiness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as happiness. When in a state of happiness, you understand: 'I'm in a
state of happiness.' With the cessation of that contact to be
experienced as happiness, you understand that the corresponding faculty
of happiness ceases and stops.

The faculty of sadness arises dependent on a contact to be experienced
as sadness. When in a state of sadness, you understand: 'I'm in a state
of sadness.' With the cessation of that contact to be experienced as
sadness, you understand that the corresponding faculty of sadness ceases
and stops.

The faculty of equanimity arises dependent on a contact to be
experienced as equanimous. When in a state of equanimity, you
understand: 'I'm in a state of equanimity.' With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as equanimous, you understand that the
corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and stops.

When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is
produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any
corresponding heat ceases and stops.

In the same way, the faculty of pleasure arises dependent on a contact
to be experienced as pleasant. When in a state of pleasure, you
understand: 'I'm in a state of pleasure.' With the cessation of that
contact to be experienced as pleasant, you understand that the
corresponding faculty of pleasure ceases and stops.

The faculty of pain ... happiness ... sadness ... equanimity arises
dependent on a contact to be experienced as equanimous. When in a state
of equanimity, you understand: 'I'm in a state of equanimity.' With the
cessation of that contact to be experienced as equanimous, you
understand that the corresponding faculty of equanimity ceases and
stops."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.40 Irregular Order *Uppaṭipāṭikasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
pain, sadness, pleasure, happiness, and equanimity.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of pain arises. They understand: 'The faculty of pain has arisen
in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason. It's
not possible for the faculty of pain to arise without a basis, a source,
a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty of pain, its
origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of pain that's arisen
ceases without anything left over. And where does that faculty of pain
that's arisen cease without anything left over? It's when a mendicant,
quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskillful
qualities, enters and remains in the first absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of seclusion, while placing the mind and keeping
it connected. That's where the faculty of pain that's arisen ceases
without anything left over. They're called a mendicant who understands
the cessation of the faculty of pain, and who applies their mind to that
end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of sadness arises. They understand: 'The faculty of sadness has
arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a reason.
It's not possible for the faculty of sadness to arise without a basis, a
source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty of
sadness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of sadness
that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where does that
faculty of sadness that's arisen cease without anything left over? It's
when, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a
mendicant enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the
rapture and bliss born of immersion, with internal clarity and mind at
one, without placing the mind and keeping it connected. That's where the
faculty of sadness that's arisen ceases without anything left over.
They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty
of sadness, and who applies their mind to that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of pleasure arises. They understand: 'The faculty of pleasure
has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a
reason. It's not possible for the faculty of pleasure to arise without a
basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the faculty
of pleasure, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty of
pleasure that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where does
that faculty of pleasure that's arisen cease without anything left over?
It's when, with the fading away of rapture, a mendicant enters and
remains in the third absorption, where they meditate with equanimity,
mindful and aware, personally experiencing the bliss of which the noble
ones declare, 'Equanimous and mindful, one meditates in bliss.' That's
where the faculty of pleasure that's arisen ceases without anything left
over. They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the
faculty of pleasure, and who applies their mind to that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of happiness arises. They understand: 'The faculty of happiness
has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a condition, and a
reason. It's not possible for the faculty of happiness to arise without
a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They understand the
faculty of happiness, its origin, its cessation, and where that faculty
of happiness that's arisen ceases without anything left over. And where
does that faculty of happiness that's arisen cease without anything left
over? It's when, giving up pleasure and pain, and ending former
happiness and sadness, a mendicant enters and remains in the fourth
absorption, without pleasure or pain, with pure equanimity and
mindfulness. That's where the faculty of happiness that's arisen ceases
without anything left over. They're called a mendicant who understands
the cessation of the faculty of happiness, and who applies their mind to
that end.

While a mendicant is meditating---diligent, keen, and resolute---the
faculty of equanimity arises. They understand: 'The faculty of
equanimity has arisen in me. And that has a basis, a source, a
condition, and a reason. It's not possible for the faculty of equanimity
to arise without a basis, a source, a condition, or a reason.' They
understand the faculty of equanimity, its origin, its cessation, and
where that faculty of equanimity that's arisen ceases without anything
left over. And where does that faculty of equanimity that's arisen cease
without anything left over? It's when a mendicant, going totally beyond
the dimension of neither perception nor non-perception, enters and
remains in the cessation of perception and feeling. That's where the
faculty of equanimity that's arisen ceases without anything left over.
They're called a mendicant who understands the cessation of the faculty
of equanimity, and who applies their mind to that end."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Old Age

### SN 48.41 Old Age *Jarādhammasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. Then in the late afternoon, the Buddha
came out of retreat and sat warming his back in the last rays of the
sun.

Then Venerable Ānanda went up to the Buddha, bowed, and while massaging
the Buddha's limbs he said:

"It's incredible, sir, it's amazing, how the complexion of your skin is
no longer pure and bright. Your limbs are flaccid and wrinkled, and your
body is stooped. And it's apparent that there has been a deterioration
in your faculties of eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body."

"That's how it is, Ānanda. When young you're liable to grow old; when
healthy you're liable to get sick; and when alive you're liable to die.
The complexion of the skin is no longer pure and bright. The limbs are
flaccid and wrinkled, and the body is stooped. And it's apparent that
there has been a deterioration in the faculties of eye, ear, nose,
tongue, and body."

That is what the Buddha said. Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to
say:

> "Curse this wretched old age,\
> which makes you so ugly.\
> That's how much this delightful puppet\
> is ground down by old age.
>
> Even if you live for a hundred years,\
> you'll still end up dying.\
> Death spares no-one,\
> but crushes all underfoot."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.42 The Brahmin Uṇṇābha *Uṇṇābhabrāhmaṇasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

Then Uṇṇābha the brahmin went up to the Buddha, and
exchanged greetings with him. When the greetings and polite conversation
were over, he sat down to one side and said to the Buddha:

"Worthy Gotama, these five faculties have different domains and
different ranges, and don't experience each others' domain and range.
What five? The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. What
do these five faculties, with their different domains and ranges, have
recourse to? What experiences their domains and ranges?"

"Brahmin, these five faculties have different domains and different
ranges, and don't experience each others' domain and range. What five?
The faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. These five
faculties, with their different domains and ranges, have recourse to the
mind. And the mind experiences their domains and ranges."

"But worthy Gotama, what does the mind have recourse to?"

"The mind has recourse to mindfulness."

"But what does mindfulness have recourse to?"

"Mindfulness has recourse to freedom."

"But what does freedom have recourse to?"

"Freedom has recourse to extinguishment."

"But what does extinguishment have recourse to?"

"This question goes too far, brahmin! You weren't able to grasp the
limit of questioning. For extinguishment is the culmination,
destination, and end of the spiritual life."

And then the brahmin Uṇṇābha approved and agreed with what
the Buddha said. He got up from his seat, bowed, and respectfully
circled the Buddha, keeping him on his right, before leaving.

Then, not long after he had left, the Buddha addressed the mendicants:
"Suppose there was a bungalow or a hall with a peaked roof, with windows
on the eastern side. When the sun rises and a ray of light enters
through a window, where would it land?"

"On the western wall, sir."

"In the same way, the brahmin Uṇṇābha's faith in the
Realized One is settled, rooted, and planted deep. It's strong and can't
be shifted by any ascetic or brahmin or god or Māra or
divinity or by anyone in the world. If he were to pass away at this
time, he would be bound by no fetter that might return him to this
world."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.43 At Sāketa *Sāketasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāketa in the deer park at the Añjana Wood.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, is there a
method in which the five faculties become the five powers, and the five
powers become the five faculties?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. He is our guide and our refuge.
Sir, may the Buddha himself please clarify the meaning of this. The
mendicants will listen and remember it."

"Mendicants, there is a method in which the five faculties become the
five powers, and the five powers become the five faculties.

And what is that method? The faculty of faith is the power of faith, and
the power of faith is the faculty of faith. The faculty of energy is the
power of energy, and the power of energy is the faculty of energy. The
faculty of mindfulness is the power of mindfulness, and the power of
mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness. The faculty of immersion is
the power of immersion, and the power of immersion is the faculty of
immersion. The faculty of wisdom is the power of wisdom, and the power
of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

Suppose that there was a river slanting, sloping, and inclining to the
east, and in the middle was an island. There's a method in which that
river can be reckoned to have just one stream. But there's also a method
in which that river can be reckoned to have two streams.

And what's the method in which that river can be reckoned to have just
one stream? By taking into account the water to the east and the west of
the island, that river can be reckoned to have just one stream.

And what's the method in which that river can be reckoned to have two
streams? By taking into account the water to the north and the south of
the island, that river can be reckoned to have two streams.

By the same method, the faculty of faith is the power of faith, and the
power of faith is the faculty of faith. The faculty of energy is the
power of energy, and the power of energy is the faculty of energy. The
faculty of mindfulness is the power of mindfulness, and the power of
mindfulness is the faculty of mindfulness. The faculty of immersion is
the power of immersion, and the power of immersion is the faculty of
immersion. The faculty of wisdom is the power of wisdom, and the power
of wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

It's because of developing and cultivating the five faculties that a
mendicant realizes the undefiled freedom of heart and freedom by wisdom
in this very life. And they live having realized it with their own
insight due to the ending of defilements."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.44 At the Eastern Gate *Pubbakoṭṭhakasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in
Sāvatthī at the eastern gate. Then the Buddha said to
Venerable Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, do you have faith that the faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and
cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death?"

"Sir, in this case I don't rely on faith in the Buddha's claim that the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when
developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death. There are those who have not known or seen or understood or
realized or experienced this with wisdom. They may rely on faith in this
matter. But there are those who have known, seen, understood, realized,
and experienced this with wisdom. They have no doubts or uncertainties
in this matter. I have known, seen, understood, realized, and
experienced this with wisdom. I have no doubts or uncertainties that the
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when
developed and cultivated, culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! There are those who have not known
or seen or understood or realized or experienced this with wisdom. They
may rely on faith in this matter. But there are those who have known,
seen, understood, realized, and experienced this with wisdom. They have
no doubts or uncertainties that the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, when developed and cultivated,
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.45 At the Eastern Monastery (1st) *Paṭhamapubbārāmasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Sāvatthī in the stilt longhouse of Migāra's
mother in the Eastern Monastery. There the Buddha addressed the
mendicants: "Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and
cultivate so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand:
"Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to
be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate one faculty so that they can
declare enlightenment. What one? The faculty of wisdom. When a noble
disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion that
follow along with that become stabilized. This is the one faculty that a
mendicant must develop and cultivate so that they can declare
enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place"'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.46 At the Eastern Monastery (2nd) *Dutiyapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate two faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What two? Noble wisdom and noble freedom. For
their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom. And their noble freedom is
the faculty of immersion.

These are the two faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.47 At the Eastern Monastery (3rd) *Tatiyapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate four faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What four? The faculties of energy, mindfulness,
immersion, and wisdom.

These are the four faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.48 At the Eastern Monastery (4th) *Catutthapubbārāmasutta*

The same setting.

"Mendicants, how many faculties must a mendicant develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"A mendicant must develop and cultivate five faculties so that they can
declare enlightenment. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

These are the five faculties that a mendicant must develop and cultivate
so that they can declare enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is
ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has
been done, there is nothing further for this place"'."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.49 About Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer *Piṇḍolabhāradvājasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer had
declared enlightenment: "I understand: 'Rebirth is ended, the spiritual
journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is
nothing further for this place.'"

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one
side, and told him what had happened. Then they said, "What reason does
Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer see for doing this?"

"It's because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed
and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment: 'I
understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed,
what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this
place."'

What three? The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

It's because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and
cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment.

What's the culmination of these three faculties? They culminate in
ending. In the ending of what? Of rebirth, old age, and death.

It's because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old
age, and death that Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer declares
enlightenment: 'I understand: "Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey
has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing
further for this place."'"

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.50 At Āpaṇa *Āpaṇasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Aṅgas, near the Aṅgan town called
Āpaṇa. Then the Buddha said to Venerable
Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, would a noble disciple who is sure and devoted
to the Realized One have any doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One
or his instructions?"

"Sir, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the Realized One would
have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One or his instructions.

You can expect that a faithful noble disciple will live with energy
roused up for giving up unskillful qualities and embracing skillful
qualities. They're strong, staunchly vigorous, not slacking off when it
comes to developing skillful qualities. For their energy is the faculty
of energy.

You can expect that a faithful and energetic noble disciple will be
mindful, with utmost mindfulness and alertness, able to remember and
recall what was said and done long ago. For their mindfulness is the
faculty of mindfulness.

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, and mindful noble disciple
will, relying on letting go, gain immersion, gain unification of mind.
For their samādhi is the faculty of immersion.

You can expect that a faithful, energetic, mindful noble disciple with
their mind immersed in samādhi will understand this:
'Transmigration has no known beginning. No first point is found of
sentient beings roaming and transmigrating, shrouded by ignorance and
fettered by craving. But when that dark mass of ignorance fades away and
ceases with nothing left over, that state is peaceful and sublime. That
is, the stilling of all activities, the letting go of all attachments,
the ending of craving, fading away, cessation, extinguishment.' For
their noble wisdom is the faculty of wisdom.

When a noble disciple has tried again and again, recollected again and
again, entered immersion again and again, and understood with wisdom
again and again, they will be confident of this: 'I have previously
heard of these things. But now I have direct meditative experience of
them, and see them with penetrating wisdom.' For their faith is the
faculty of faith."

"Good, good, Sāriputta!

Sāriputta, a noble disciple who is sure and devoted to the
Realized One would have no doubt or uncertainty about the Realized One
or his instructions. ..."

The Buddha then repeated Sāriputta's answer word for word.

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on the Boar's Cave

### SN 48.51 At Sālā *Sālasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Kosalans near the brahmin village of Sālā.
There the Buddha addressed the mendicants: "Mendicants, the lion, king
of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength,
speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be
the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened. The lion,
king of beasts, is said to be the best of animals in terms of strength,
speed, and courage. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be
the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.52 In the Land of the Mallas *Mallikasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying in the
land of the Mallas, near the Mallian town called Uruvelakappa. There the
Buddha addressed the mendicants:

"Mendicants, as long as noble knowledge hasn't arisen for a noble
disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. But when noble
knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become
stable and fixed.

It's just like in a bungalow. As long as the roof peak is not lifted
into place, the rafters are not stable or fixed. But when the roof peak
is lifted into place, the rafters become stable and fixed.

In the same way, as long as noble knowledge hasn't arisen for a noble
disciple the four faculties are not stable and fixed. But when noble
knowledge has arisen for a noble disciple the four faculties become
stable and fixed.

What four? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, and immersion.
When a noble disciple has wisdom, the faith, energy, mindfulness, and
immersion that follow along with that become stabilized."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.53 A Trainee *Sekhasutta*

So I have heard. At one time the Buddha was staying near
Kosambī, in Ghosita's Monastery. There the Buddha addressed
the mendicants: "Mendicants, is there a way that a mendicant who is a
trainee, standing at the level of a trainee, can understand that they
are a trainee? And that a mendicant who is an adept, standing at the
level of an adept, can understand that they are an adept?"

"Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. ..."

"There is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee, standing at the level
of a trainee, can understand that they are a trainee, and that a
mendicant who is an adept, standing at the level of an adept, can
understand that they are an adept.

And what is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee can understand that
they are a trainee? It's when a mendicant who is a trainee truly
understands: 'This is suffering' ... 'This is the origin of suffering'
... 'This is the cessation of suffering' ... 'This is the practice that
leads to the cessation of suffering'. This is a way that a mendicant who
is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee reflects: 'Is there any other
ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as
accurate as that of the Buddha?' They understand: 'There is no other
ascetic or brahmin elsewhere whose teaching is as true, as real, as
accurate as that of the Buddha.' This too is a way that a mendicant who
is a trainee can understand that they are a trainee.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is a trainee understands the five
faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. And
although they don't have direct meditative experience of their
destination, apex, fruit, and culmination, they do see them with
penetrating wisdom. This too is a way that a mendicant who is a trainee
can understand that they are a trainee.

And what is the way that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that
they are an adept? It's when a mendicant who is an adept understands the
five faculties: faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. They
have direct meditative experience of their destination, apex, fruit, and
culmination, and they see them with penetrating wisdom. This is a way
that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept.

Furthermore, a mendicant who is an adept understands the six faculties:
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. They understand: 'These six
faculties will totally and utterly cease without anything left over. And
no other six faculties will arise anywhere anyhow.' This too is a way
that a mendicant who is an adept can understand that they are an adept."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.54 Footprints *Padasutta*

"The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the steps that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the steps that lead to awakening? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are steps that lead to
awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

The footprints of all creatures that walk can fit inside an elephant's
footprint, so an elephant's footprint is said to be the biggest of them
all. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the steps that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.55 Heartwood *Sārasutta*

"Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

Of all kinds of fragrant heartwood, red sandalwood is said to be the
best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of
the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.56 Grounded *Patiṭṭhitasutta*

"Mendicants, when a mendicant is grounded in one thing the five
faculties become developed, well developed. What one thing? Diligence.
And what is diligence? It's when a mendicant looks after their mind when
it comes to defilements and things that stimulate defilements. As they
do so the faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom
are fully developed. That's how when a mendicant is grounded in one
thing the five faculties become developed, well developed."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.57 With the Divinity Sahampati *Sahampatibrahmasutta*

At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying in
Uruvelā at the goatherd's banyan tree on the bank of the
Nerañjarā River.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind, "When
these five faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate,
finish, and end in freedom from death. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death."

Then the divinity Sahampati knew what the Buddha was thinking. As easily
as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from
the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha. He arranged
his robe over one shoulder, raised his joined palms toward the Buddha,
and said:

"That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end
in freedom from death. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties are
developed and cultivated they culminate, finish, and end in freedom from
death.

Once upon a time, sir, I lived the spiritual life under the fully
awakened Buddha Kassapa. There they knew me as the mendicant Sahaka.
Because of developing and cultivating these same five faculties I lost
desire for sensual pleasures. When my body broke up, after death, I was
reborn in a good place, in the realm of divinity. There they know me as
the divinity Sahampati.

That's so true, Blessed One! That's so true, Holy One! I know and see
how when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
culminate, finish, and end in freedom from death."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.58 The Boar's Cave *Sūkarakhatasutta*

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the
Vulture's Peak Mountain in the Boar's Cave. Then the Buddha said to
Venerable Sāriputta:

"Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a mendicant with
defilements ended, while still alive, continue to show utmost devotion
for the Realized One or his instructions?"

"Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a
mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to show
utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For it is considering the supreme
sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant whose defilements are ended,
while still alive, continues to show utmost devotion for the Realized
One or his instructions.

And what is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke?"

"It's when a mendicant with defilements ended develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which lead to peace
and awakening. It is considering this supreme sanctuary from the yoke
that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to
show utmost devotion for the Realized One or his instructions."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that supreme sanctuary
from the yoke.

And what is that utmost devotion that a mendicant with defilements
ended, while still alive, continues to show towards the Realized One or
his instructions?"

"It's when a mendicant with defilements ended maintains respect and
reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the
training, and immersion. This is that utmost devotion."

"Good, good, Sāriputta! For this is that utmost devotion
that a mendicant with defilements ended, while still alive, continues to
show towards the Realized One or his instructions."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.59 Arising (1st) *Paṭhamauppādasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, these five faculties don't arise to be developed and
cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one, a fully awakened
Buddha has appeared. What five? The faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These five faculties don't arise to
be developed and cultivated except when a Realized One, a perfected one,
a fully awakened Buddha has appeared."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.60 Arising (2nd) *Dutiyauppādasutta*

"Mendicants, these five faculties don't arise to be developed and
cultivated apart from the Holy One's training. What five? The faculties
of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These five
faculties don't arise to be developed and cultivated apart from the Holy
One's training."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Leading to Awakening

### SN 48.61 Fetters *Saṁyojanasutta*

At Sāvatthī.

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to giving up the fetters. What five? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties
are developed and cultivated they lead to giving up the fetters."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.62 Tendencies *Anusayasutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to uprooting the underlying tendencies. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five
faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to uprooting the
underlying tendencies."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.63 Complete Understanding *Pariññāsutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to the complete understanding of the course of time. What five? The
faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When
these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead to the
complete understanding of the course of time."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.64 Ending of Defilements *Āsavakkhayasutta*

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to the ending of defilements. What five? The faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. When these five faculties
are developed and cultivated they lead to the ending of defilements."

"Mendicants, when these five faculties are developed and cultivated they
lead to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the defilements.
What five? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom. When these five faculties are developed and cultivated they lead
to giving up the fetters, uprooting the underlying tendencies,
completely understanding the course of time, and ending the
defilements."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.65 Two Fruits *Paṭhamaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, one of two
results can be expected: enlightenment in this very life, or if there's
something left over, non-return."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.66 Seven Benefits *Dutiyaphalasutta*

"Mendicants, there are these five faculties. What five? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom. These are the five
faculties.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, seven fruits
and benefits can be expected. What seven? They attain enlightenment
early on in this very life. If not, they attain enlightenment at the
time of death. If not, with the ending of the five lower fetters,
they're extinguished between one life and the next ... they're
extinguished upon landing ... they're extinguished without extra effort
... they're extinguished with extra effort ... they head upstream, going
to the Akaniṭṭha realm.

Because of developing and cultivating these five faculties, these seven
fruits and benefits can be expected."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.67 A Tree (1st) *Paṭhamarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees in the Black Plum Tree Land, the black
plum is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is
said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to awakening?
The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are
qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming
awakened. Of all the trees in the Black Plum Tree Land, the black plum
is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said
to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.68 A Tree (2nd) *Dutiyarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the gods of the thirty-three,
the Shady Orchid Tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the
faculty of wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to
awakening in terms of becoming awakened.

And what are the qualities that lead to awakening? The faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are qualities that
lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming awakened.

Of all the trees belonging to the gods of the thirty-three, the Shady
Orchid Tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.69 A Tree (3rd) *Tatiyarukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the titans, the vivid patala
is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said
to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of
becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to awakening?
The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom are
qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to becoming
awakened. Of all the trees belonging to the titans, the vivid patala is
said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of wisdom is said to
be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in terms of becoming
awakened."

<!--pg-->
### SN 48.70 A Tree (4th) *Catuttharukkhasutta*

"Mendicants, of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red
silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened. And what are the qualities that lead to
awakening? The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and
wisdom are qualities that lead to awakening, in that they lead to
becoming awakened. Of all the trees belonging to the phoenixes, the red
silk-cotton tree is said to be the best. In the same way, the faculty of
wisdom is said to be the best of the qualities that lead to awakening in
terms of becoming awakened."

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### SN 48.71--82 Slanting East, Etc. *Gaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant developing and cultivating the five
faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on seclusion, fading
away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go. That's how a mendicant
developing and cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and
inclines to extinguishment."

> ::: footnotesize
> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Diligence

### SN 48.83--92 The Chapter on Diligence *Appamādavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on diligence at SN 45.139--148.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> The Realized One, footprint, roof peak,\
> roots, heartwood, jasmine,\
> monarch, sun and moon,\
> and cloth is the tenth.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Hard Work

### SN 48.93--104 The Chapter on Hard Work *Balakaraṇīyavagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on hard work at SN 45.149--160.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Hard work, seeds, and dragons,\
> a tree, a pot, and a spike,\
> the atmosphere, and two on clouds,\
> a ship, a guest house, and a river.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Searches

### SN 48.105--114 The Chapter on Searches *Esanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in the chapter on searches at SN 45.161--170.)**

> ::: footnotesize
> Searches, discriminations, defilements,\
> states of existence, three kinds of suffering,\
> barrenness, stains, and troubles,\
> feelings, craving, and thirst.
> :::

<!--pg-->
## The Chapter on Floods

### SN 48.115--124 Floods, etc. *Oghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What five? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which rely on
seclusion, fading away, and cessation, and ripen as letting go.

These five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters."

*(Tell in full as in the Linked Discourses on the Path, SN 45.171--179,
with the above as the final discourse.)*

> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.

<!--pg-->
## Another Chapter of Abbreviated Texts on the Ganges

### SN 48.125--136 Another on Sloping East, Etc. *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

"Mendicants, the Ganges river slants, slopes, and inclines to the east.
In the same way, a mendicant developing and cultivating the five
faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to extinguishment.

How so? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of faith, energy,
mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in the removal of
greed, hate, and delusion. That's how a mendicant developing and
cultivating the five faculties slants, slopes, and inclines to
extinguishment."

> Six on slanting to the east,\
> and six on slanting to the ocean;\
> these two sixes make twelve,\
> and that's how this chapter is recited.


<!--pg-->
## Another Chapter on Diligence

### SN 48.137--146 Another Chapter on Diligence *Punaappamādavagga*

*(This text consists of the title only. Tell in full as in SN
45\.139--148, removal of greed version.)*


<!--pg-->
## Another Chapter on Hard Work

### SN 48.147--158 Another Chapter on Hard Work *Punagaṅgāpeyyālavagga*

*(This text consists of the title only. Tell in full as in SN
45\.149--160, removal of greed version.)*


<!--pg-->
## Another Chapter on Searches

### SN 48.159--168 Another Chapter on Searches *Punaesanāvagga*

**(Tell in full as in SN 45.161--170, removal of greed version.)**

<!--pg-->
## Another Chapter on Floods

### SN 48.169--178 Another Series on Floods, Etc. *Punaoghavagga*

"Mendicants, there are five higher fetters. What five? Desire for
rebirth in the realm of luminous form, desire for rebirth in the
formless realm, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. These are the five
higher fetters.

The five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters. What five? It's when a mendicant develops the faculties of
faith, energy, mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom, which culminate in
the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

These five faculties should be developed for the direct knowledge,
complete understanding, finishing, and giving up of these five higher
fetters."

> Floods, yokes, grasping,\
> ties, and underlying tendencies,\
> kinds of sensual stimulation, hindrances,\
> aggregates, and fetters high and low.




