# 18 The Honeyball
***(Madhupindika Sutta)***

1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kapilavatthu for alms. When he had wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Great Wood for the day's abiding, and entering the Great Wood, sat down at the root of a bilva sapling for the day's abiding.

3. Daṇḍapāni the Sakyan, while walking and wandering for exercise, also went to the Great Wood, and when he had entered the Great Wood, he went to the bilva sapling where the Blessed One was and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side leaning on his stick and asked the Blessed One: "What does the recluse assert, what does he proclaim?"226

4. "Friend, I assert and proclaim such [a teaching] that one does not quarrel with anyone in the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, in this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people; such [a teaching] that perceptions no more underlie that brahmin who abides detached from sensual pleasures, without perplexity, shorn of worry, free from craving for any kind of being." [^227]

5. When this was said, Daṇḍapāni the Sakyan shook his head, [109] wagged his tongue, and raised his eyebrows until his forehead was puckered in three lines. [^228] Then he departed, leaning on his stick.

6. Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation and went to Nigrodha's Park, where he sat down on a seat made ready for him and told the bhikkhus what had taken place. Then a certain bhikkhu asked the Blessed One:

7. "But, venerable sir, what is [the teaching] that the Blessed One asserts whereby one does not quarrel with anyone in the world with its gods, its Māras, and its Brahmās, in this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people? And, venerable sir, how is it that perceptions no more underlie that brahmin who abides detached from sensual pleasures, without perplexity, shorn of worry, free from craving for any kind of being?"

8. "Bhikkhus, as to the source through which perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to delight in, welcome and hold to, this is the end of the underlying tendency to lust, of the underlying tendency to aversion, [110] of the underlying tendency to views, of the underlying tendency to doubt, of the underlying tendency to conceit, of the underlying tendency to desire for being, of the underlying tendency to ignorance; this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice, and false speech; here these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder." ${ }^{\prime 229}$

9. That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Sublime One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling.

10. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus considered: "Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning. Now who will expound this in detail?" Then they considered: "The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life. ${ }^{230} \mathrm{He}$ is capable of expounding the detailed meaning. Suppose we went to him and asked him the meaning of this."

11. Then the bhikkhus went to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down to one side and told him what had taken place, [111] adding: "Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it to us."

12. [The venerable Mahā Kaccāna replied:] "Friends, it is as though a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, thought that heartwood should be sought for among the branches and leaves of a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, after he had passed over the root
and the trunk. And so it is with you, venerable sirs, that you think that I should be asked about the meaning of this, after you passed the Blessed One by when you were face to face with the Teacher. For knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he is vision, he is knowledge, he is the Dhamma, he is the holy one; [^231] he is the sayer, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning, the giver of the Deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathāgata. That was the time when you should have asked the Blessed One the meaning. As he told you, so you should have remembered it."

13. "Surely, friend Kaccāna, knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees; he is vision...the Tathāgata. That was the time when we should have asked the Blessed One the meaning. As he told us, so we should have remembered it. Yet the venerable Mahā Kaccāna is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Mahā Kaccāna is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this summary given in brief by the Blessed One without expounding the detailed meaning. Let the venerable Mahā Kaccāna expound it without finding it troublesome."

14. "Then listen, friends, and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Mahā Kaccāna said this:

15. "Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, that is: 'Bhikkhus, as to the source through which perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to delight in, welcome, and hold to, this is the end of the underlying tendency to lust...this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons...here these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder,' I understand the detailed meaning of it to be as follows:

16. "Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition there is feeling. What one feels, that one perceives. [112] What one perceives, that one thinks about. What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates. With what one has mentally proliferated as the source, perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man with respect to past, future, and present forms cognizable through the eye. [^232]
"Dependent on the ear and sounds...Dependent on the nose and odours...Dependent on the tongue and flavours...Dependent on the body and tangibles...Dependent on the mind and mindobjects, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition there is feeling. What one feels, that one perceives. What one perceives, that one thinks about. What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates. With what one has mentally proliferated as the source, perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man with respect to past, future, and present mind-objects cognizable through the mind.

17. "When there is the eye, a form, and eye-consciousness, it is possible to point out the manifestation of contact. [^233] When there is the manifestation of contact, it is possible to point out the manifestation of feeling. When there is the manifestation of feeling, it is possible to point out the manifestation of perception. When there is the manifestation of perception, it is possible to point out the manifestation of thinking. When there is the manifestation of thinking, it is possible to point out the manifestation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation.

"When there is the ear, a sound, and ear-consciousness... When there is the nose, an odour, and nose-consciousness...When there is the tongue, a flavour, and tongue-consciousness...When there is the body, a tangible, and body-consciousness... When there is the mind, a mind-object, and mind-consciousness...it is possible to point out the manifestation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation.

18. "When there is no eye, no form, and no eye-consciousness, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of contact. When there is no manifestation of contact, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of feeling. When there is no manifestation of feeling, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of perception. When there is no manifestation of perception, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of thinking. When there is no manifestation of thinking, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation.

"When there is no ear, no sound, and no ear-consciousness... When there is no nose, no odour, and no nose-consciousness...

When there is no tongue, no flavour, and no tongueconsciousness...When there is no body, no tangible, and no body-consciousness...When there is no mind, no mind-object, and no mind-consciousness...it is impossible to point out the manifestation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation.

19. "Friends, when the Blessed One [113] rose from his seat and went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without expounding the detailed meaning, that is: 'Bhikkhus, as to the source through which perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to delight in, welcome, and hold to, this is the end of the underlying tendency to lust, of the underlying tendency to aversion, of the underlying tendency to views, of the underlying tendency to doubt, of the underlying tendency to conceit, of the underlying tendency to desire for being, of the underlying tendency to ignorance; this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice, and false speech; here these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder,' I understand the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus. Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this. As the Blessed One explains it to you, so you should remember it."

20. Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Mahā Kaccāna's words, rose from their seats and went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told the Blessed One all that had taken place after he had left, adding: "Then, venerable sir, we went to the venerable Mahā Kaccāna and asked him about the meaning. [114] The venerable Mahā Kaccāna expounded the meaning to us with these terms, statements, and phrases."

21. "Mahā Kaccāna is wise, bhikkhus, Mahā Kaccāna has great wisdom. If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you in the same way that Mahā Kaccāna has explained it. Such is the meaning of this, and so you should remember it."

22. When this was said, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, just as if a man exhausted by hunger and weakness came upon a honeyball, [^234] in the course of
eating it he would find a sweet delectable flavour; so too, venerable sir, any able-minded bhikkhu, in the course of scrutinising with wisdom the meaning of this discourse on the Dhamma, would find satisfaction and confidence of mind. Venerable sir, what is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma?"

"As to that, Ānanda, you may remember this discourse on the Dhamma as 'The Honeyball Discourse.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ānanda was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.

## Notes

[^226]: Daṇḍapāni, whose name means "stick-in-hand," was so called because he used to walk around ostentatiously with a golden walking stick, even though he was still young and healthy. According to MA, he sided with Devadatta, the Buddha's arch foe, when the latter attempted to create a schism in the Buddha's following. His manner of asking the question is arrogant and deliberately provocative.

[^227]: The first part of the Buddha's reply directly counters Daṇḍapāni's aggressive attitude. MA quotes in this connection SN 22:94/iii.138: "Bhikkhus, I do not dispute with the world, it is the world that disputes with me. A speaker of Dhamma does not dispute with anyone in the world." The second part may be taken to mean that, for the arahant (spoken of here as "that brahmin" with reference to the Buddha himself), perceptions no longer awaken the dormant underlying tendencies to defile-
ments, to be enumerated in $ 8.

[^228]: This response seems to be an expression of frustration and bewilderment.

[^229]: The interpretation of this cryptic passage hinges on the word papañca and the compound papañca-saññā-sankhā. Nim had translated the former as "diversification" and the latter as "calculations about perceptions of diversification." It seems, however, that the primary problem to which the term papañca points is not "diversification," which may be quite in place when the sensory field itself displays diversity, but the propensity of the worldling's imagination to erupt in an effusion of mental commentary that obscures the bare data of cognition. In a penetrative study, Concept and Reality in Early Buddhism, Bhikkhu Nānananda explains papañca as "conceptual proliferation," and I follow him in substituting "proliferation" for Nm's "diversification." The commentaries identify the springs of this proliferation as the three factors - craving, conceit, and views - on account of which the mind "embellishes" experience by interpreting it in terms of "mine," "I" and "my self." Papañca is thus closely akin to the maññanā, "conceiving," of MN 1 - see n.6.
The compound papañca-saññā-sankhā is more problematic. Ven. Nānananda interprets it to mean "concepts characterised by the mind's prolific tendency," but this explanation still leaves the word sañña out of account. MA glosses sankhā by kotthāsa, "portion," and says that sañña is either perception associated with papañca or papañca itself. I go along with Ven. Nānananda in taking sankhā to mean concept or notion (Nm's "calculation" is too literal) rather than portion. My decision to treat saññā-sankhā as a dvanda compound, "perceptions and notions," may be questioned, but as the expression papañca-saññā-sankhā occurs but rarely in the Canon and is never verbally analysed, no rendering is utterly beyond doubt. On alternative interpretations of its components, the expression might have been rendered "notions [arisen from] the proliferation of perceptions" or "perceptual notions [arisen from] proliferation."
The sequel will make it clear that the process of cogni-
tion is itself "the source through which perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man." If nothing in the process of cognition is found to delight in, to welcome, or to hold to, the underlying tendencies of the defilements will come to an end.

[^230]: Ven. Mahā Kaccāna was declared by the Buddha to be the most eminent disciple in expounding the detailed meaning of a brief saying. MN 133 and MN 138 were also spoken by him under similar circumstances.

[^231]: Cakkhubhūto ñānabhūto dhammabhūto brahmabhūto. MA: He is vision in the sense that he is the leader in vision; he is knowledge in the sense that he makes things known; he is the Dhamma in the sense that he consists of the Dhamma that he utters verbally after considering it in his heart; he is Brahmā, the holy one, in the sense of the best.

[^232]: This passage shows how papañca, emerging from the process of cognition, gives rise to perceptions and notions that overwhelm and victimise their hapless creator. Ms contains a note by $\overline{\mathrm{N}} \mathrm{m}$ : "The meeting of eye, form, and eye-consciousness is called contact. Contact, according to dependent origination, is the principal condition of feeling. Feeling and perception are inseparable (MN 43.9). What is perceived as 'this' is thought about in its differences and is thus diversified from 'that' and from 'me.' This diversification - involving craving for form, wrong view about permanence of form, etc., and the conceit 'I am' - leads to preoccupation with calculating the desirability of past and present forms with a view to obtaining desirable forms in the future." Perhaps the key to the interpretation of this passage is Ven. Mahā Kaccāna's explanation of the Bhaddekaratta verses in MN 133. There too delight in the elements of cognition plays a prominent role in causing bondage, and the elaboration of the verses in terms of the three periods of time links up with the reference to the three times in this sutta.

[^233]: The Pali idiom phassapañāattim paññāpessati, in which the verb takes an object derived from itself, is difficult. $\overline{N m}$ originally rendered "that one will describe a description of contact." "To point out a manifestation" is less literal,
but it should do justice to the meaning without jeopardising intelligibility. MA says that this passage is intended to show the entire round of existence (vatiṭa) by way of the twelve sense bases; $ 18 shows the cessation of the round (vivaṭta) by the negation of the twelve sense bases.

[^234]: A large sweet cake or a ball made from flour, ghee, molasses, honey, sugar, etc. See also AN 5:194/iii. 237.

