# Bibliography

## A. PALI TEXTS

The Majjhima Nikāya. 3 vols. Vol. 1 edited by V. Trenckner; Vols. 2 and 3 edited by Robert Chalmers. First published 1888-99. Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1977-79. Roman-script edition.

The Majjhima Nikāya. 3 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1954. Burmese-script edition published in connection with the Sixth Buddhist Council held in Burma, 1954-56.

The Majjhima Nikāya. 3 vols. Sri Lanka: Lanka Buddha Mandalaya, 1964-74. Sinhala-script edition published in the Buddha Jayanti Tripitaka Series; Sinhala translation on facing pages.

Majjhima Nikāya Atṭhakatha (Papañcasūdanī). 4 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1957. Burmese-script edition of Ācariya Buddhaghosa's commentary to the Majjhima Nikāya.

Majjhima Nikāya Tīkā. 3 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasāsana Samiti, 1961. Burmese-script edition of Ācariya Dhammapāla's subcommentary to the Majjhima Nikāya.

## B. TRANSLATIONS AND STUDIES

Basham, A.L. History and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas. 1951. Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1981. Study of a philosophical school to which several of the Buddha's contemporary rivals belonged.

Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Discourse on the All-Embracing Net of Views: The Brahmajāla Sutta and Its Commentaries. BPS, 1978. Translation of the first sutta in the Dīgha Nikāya, a parallel to MN 102.
—_, trans. The Discourse on the Fruits of Recluseship: The Sāmaññaphala Sutta and Its Commentaries. BPS, 1989. Translation of the second sutta in the Dīgha Nikāya; clarifies views of the six heterodox teachers often mentioned in the Majjhima Nikāya.

—_, trans. The Discourse on the Root of Existence: The Mūlapariyāya Sutta and Its Commentaries. Translation of MN 1, commentary, portions of subcommentary.

Horner, I.B., trans. The Book of the Discipline. 6 vols. London: PTS, 1949-66. Translation of the complete Vinaya Pitaka.

—_, trans. The Collection of the Middle Length Sayings. 3 vols. London: PTS, 1954-59. Long-standing translation of the complete Majjhima Nikāya.

—_. Early Buddhism and the Taking of Life. BPS Wheel No. 104, 1967.

Kloppenborg, Ria. The Paccekabuddha: A Buddhist Ascetic. BPS Wheel No. 305/307, 1983. Study of the figure extolled in MN 116.

Nānamoli, Bhikkhu, trans. The Greater Discourse on Voidness. BPS Wheel No. 87, 1965. Translation of MN 122 and commentary.

—_. The Life of the Buddha According to the Pali Canon. BPS, 1972. Biography of the Buddha constructed from canonical texts.

—_, trans. Mindfulness of Breathing. 2nd ed. BPS, 1964. Includes translation of MN 118 and related texts.

—_, trans. The Minor Readings and The Illustrator of Ultimate Meaning. London: PTS, 1960. Appendix contains discussion of translator's understanding of Pali technical terms.

—_, trans. The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga), 4th ed. BPS, 1980. Encyclopaedic work on Buddhist doctrine and meditation, by Ācariya Buddhaghosa. "Cornerstone" of the commentaries.

—_, trans. A Treasury of the Buddha's Words. Bangkok: Mahāmakutarājavidyālaya, 1980. Ninety Majjhima suttas, selected and edited by Bhikkhu Khantipālo.

Nānananda, Bhikkhu. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhism. BPS, 1971. Includes exposition of MN 18.

—_, trans. Ideal Solitude. BPS Wheel No. 188, 1973. Translation of MN 131 with introduction and notes.

Nyanaponika Thera, trans. The Discourse on the Snake Simile. BPS Wheel No. 48/49, 1962. Translation of MN 22 with introduction and notes.

—. The Five Mental Hindrances. BPS Wheel No. 26, 1961. Includes translation of commentary on similes in MN 39.

—. The Four Nutriments of Life. BPS Wheel No. 105/106, 1967. Explicates the nutriments mentioned in MN 9 and MN 38.

-, trans. The Greater Discourse on the Elephant-Footprint Simile. BPS Wheel No. 101, 1966. Translation of MN 28 with introduction and notes.

—. The Heart of Buddhist Meditation. London: Rider and Co., 1962; BPS, 1992. Includes translation of MN 10 with modern commentary.

—. The Roots of Good and Evil. BPS Wheel No. 251/253, 1978. Canonical study of the unwholesome roots and their antidotes.

——, trans. The Simile of the Cloth and The Discourse on Effacement. BPS Wheel No. 61/62, 1964. Translation of MN 7 and MN 8 with introduction and notes.

—. The Threefold Refuge. BPS Wheel No. 76, 1965. Includes commentary on refuge formula often met with in the Majjhima Nikāya.

Piyadassi Thera. The Seven Factors of Enlightenment. BPS Wheel No. 1, 1957.

Soma Thera, trans. The Removal of Distracting Thoughts. BPS Wheel No. 21, 1960. Translation of MN 20 with commentary and subcommentary.

—_, trans. The Way of Mindfulness, 5th ed. BPS, 1981. Translation of MN 10 and its commentary and subcommentary.

Thittila, Sayadaw U, trans. The Book of Analysis (Vibhanga). London: PTS, 1969. Includes explanation of Tathāgata's powers (MN 12), elements and bases (MN 115).

Walshe, Maurice, trans. Thus Have I Heard: Long Discourses of the Buddha. London: Wisdom Publications, 1987. Recent translation of the complete Dīgha Nikāya.

Watanabe, Fumimaro. Philosophy and its Development in the Nikāyas and Abhidhamma. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. Chapters on Abhidhamma elements in the Nikāyas and on the Codes ( $m \bar{a} t i k \bar{a}$ ).